EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 1 of 115
EMLYON BUSINESS SCHOOL  |  MSc Data Science & AI Strategy
Evidence-Gated Autonomy
for Retail Replenishment
A Comparative Study Using M5 and FreshRetailNet-50K
Master’s dissertation • Completed bounded two-benchmark study • October 2026
This manuscript integrates the completed M5 studies with a bounded FreshRetailNet experiment. All 
50,000 source series were profiled for integrity; forecasting and replenishment results concern the 
disclosed 30-series computational panel. Observed, inferred and simulated quantities remain distinct.
Research areas  Retail analytics  ·  operations and supply-chain management  ·  AI governance  ·  
business decision automation


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 2 of 115
Contents
Chapter 1 Introduction
Chapter 2 Literature Review
Chapter 3 Operational Grounding: Replenishment Data in Practice
Chapter 4 Methodology and Architecture
Chapter 5 Experimental Design and Evaluation Protocol
Chapter 6 Experimental Findings and Managerial Implications
Chapter 7 Ethical, Safety, and Governance Considerations
Chapter 8 Conclusion
References
Appendix A Reproducible Implementation Plan
Appendix B Source-Field Checklist and Research Assumptions
Appendix C Completed Studies and Remaining Evidence Gaps
Appendix D FreshRetailNet Results and Artifact Register
Appendix E Complete M5 Figure Register
Appendix F Complete Historical M5 Results
Detailed section headings appear in the Word Navigation Pane (View 
 Navigation Pane).
→


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 3 of 115
Abstract
What should a retailer check before allowing an artificial intelligence system to place an order? Better 
demand forecasts are useful, but they are only one part of that decision. Inventory records can be late or 
incomplete, supplier rules can be difficult to interpret, and sales histories often describe what happened 
to sell rather than what customers wanted to buy. These weaknesses matter more as automation moves 
from recommending quantities to committing expenditure without direct human review.
This dissertation investigates whether a tool-grounded large language model (LLM) multi-agent system 
can  support  retail  replenishment  without  making  the  organisation  dependent  on  unverified  AI 
judgements. It proposes  evidence-gated autonomy: automated execution is  granted only when the 
underlying business data, demand estimates, constraints, and proposed action pass explicit checks. 
Forecasting  and  optimization  remain  computational  tools;  language  models  interpret  ambiguous 
documents, coordinate exceptions, and create auditable explanations. A rule-based system with the same 
evidence checks is retained as a demanding baseline, so that any additional value attributed to an LLM 
must be demonstrated rather than presumed.
The research design is extended from one public benchmark to two. M5 supplies a long, hierarchical 
record of daily retail sales and enables established comparisons of forecasting, ordering, robustness, and 
bullwhip amplification.  FreshRetailNet-50K, released by Wang et al. (2025), provides 50,000 store-
product series from fresh retail, with hourly sales and stockout indicators, promotions, and weather. It 
makes a second form of evidential uncertainty observable: sales can be systematically censored when 
goods are unavailable. The same literature- and standards-informed canonical data model is used for both 
datasets, with a clearly identified availability-event and perishability extension. Neither public release 
provides the complete supplier and inventory state needed for a purchasing experiment; those missing 
components are simulated and treated as assumptions, not real-world measurements.
The evaluation connects M5 engineering evidence to a completed FreshRetailNet study on 30 training-
selected store–product series. The new study contains 360 conventional replenishment runs, 32 matched 
parser and LLM runs, and 1,140 independent policy experiments. Recovery was measured against 
artificially hidden sales; four forecasts were scored on a protected seven-day holdout. The language 
model used the same source checks, numerical tools and safeguards as a capable parser. Cost and fill 
were identical in 16 of 16 matched FreshRetailNet pairs; all matched M5 pairs were also identical. 
Inventory-record repair changed FreshRetailNet fault-scenario cost by 0.00% and fill by 0.00 percentage 
points. Shared benefits belong to the recovery architecture, rather than an isolated language-model 
advantage. The findings support auditable automation and availability-aware analysis. They do not 
measure real retailer profit, naturally lost demand or human trust. Additional language value requires fair 
testing on harder, independently held-out business documents and field outcomes. A separate 480-run 
follow-up was motivated by the inherited spending cap's failure to pass clean orders. A registered 
training-only calibration selected a cap of 1,850; the evaluation reuses the holdout and is explicitly 
exploratory. Its 30 simulation seeds per cell do not turn that post-primary question into an untouched 
confirmation.
Executive evidence summary
The FreshRetailNet study is complete on a frozen panel of 30 store–product series. It adds 360 
conventional replenishment runs, 32 matched parser and LLM runs, and 1,140 independent policy 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 4 of 115
experiments to the existing M5 evidence. Each main simulation run uses all 30 series. The source 
contains 50,000 series, so this panel covers 0.06% of the release. It supports a bounded engineering 
conclusion rather than a population estimate.
The original gate did not transfer successfully. Its inherited autonomous spending cap was 1,500 cost-
index points, while a clean proposed FreshRetailNet order could require about 1,656 points. In the 
primary normal parser condition, 14 of 14 decision days were held. This failure is reported before any 
repair: an architecture can be computationally feasible and still be commercially inactive if its threshold 
is carried into a new quantity scale without checking.
The central attribution check found identical cost and fill in 16 of 16 matched parser–LLM scenario and 
seed pairs. The language model was able to participate in a verified replenishment workflow. The tested 
supplier grammar did not, however, demonstrate an additional economic benefit from choosing an LLM 
over a capable parser.
Under an injected inventory-field failure, verified record repair changed mean LLM-arm cost from 
23,331.29 to 23,331.29 (+0.00%) and fill from 45.2% to 45.2% (+0.00 percentage points). The parser 
received the same repair tools. Any shared improvement belongs to the recovery architecture, rather than 
to the language model alone.
Fresh retail adds a second problem: a trustworthy stockout record can still leave demand partly 
unobserved. This study evaluates recovery on artificially hidden sales, forecasts a protected seven-day 
holdout, and examines perishability inside disclosed simulators. It does not measure true lost demand 
during natural stockouts, real retailer profit, actual waste savings, or changes in human trust.
The calibrated controller still fills 79.19% of normal simulated demand, compared with 85.03% for 
conventional B3 over the same 30 seeds. Its lower indexed cost comes with lower service and remaining 
holds. Calibration improves an unusable gate; it does not demonstrate a dominant LLM policy.
In that exploratory follow-up, the original normal-operation seed pair changed from 45.2% to 80.2% fill, 
with held days 14 to 3. This is a verified cap-transfer effect, not an incremental LLM advantage: parser–
LLM cost and fill are equal in 240/240 follow-up pairs.
A separately registered follow-up used a training-only spending-cap formula and 30 simulation seeds per 
cell, producing 480 additional runs. It is exploratory because the fixed-gate failure motivated it after 
primary observations, and it reuses the holdout. Its complete outputs appear separately; none replaces the 
primary failure.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 5 of 115
CHAPTER 1  Introduction
1.1 Replenishment as a Sequential Decision under Uncertainty
The difference between sales and customer demand makes this decision harder than a conventional 
forecast-to-order diagram suggests. In a store with available stock, observed sales may be a reasonable 
signal of demand. When a product sells out at midday, however, the remainder of the day's demand 
disappears from the transaction record. The resulting error can reinforce itself: an algorithm learns that 
sales are low and responds by ordering too little again. FreshRetailNet-50K allows this mechanism to be 
tested using recorded stockout indicators rather than assuming that every observed zero means that 
customers were not interested (Wang et al., 2025).
Inventory replenishment is a repeated business decision made under uncertainty. A retailer has to 
estimate future demand, understand what stock is actually available, account for goods already on order, 
respect supplier and budget constraints, and decide how much to buy before the consequences of that 
decision are fully known. Ordering too much ties up working capital and can lead to markdowns, 
obsolescence, or waste. Ordering too little creates stockouts, lost sales, and poor customer experience. 
The decision is therefore not simply about forecast accuracy; it is about balancing service, cost, cash, and 
operational risk over time.
Classical inventory theory provides a strong foundation for this problem. Base-stock policies, (s, S) 
policies, multi-echelon models, and stochastic dynamic programming provide transparent rules under 
clearly defined assumptions (Clark & Scarf, 1960; Zipkin, 2000). These models remain valuable because 
they make the trade-offs explicit and, unlike a generative model, they can guarantee feasibility when the 
assumptions and inputs are valid. Retail environments, however, regularly challenge those assumptions 
through  changing  assortments,  intermittent  demand,  promotions,  uncertain  lead  times,  pack-size 
restrictions, supplier minimums, and incomplete information about stock and open orders.
1.2 Two Gaps: Semantic and Evidential
A third concern links the semantic and evidential gaps: sales censoring. A sales feed can be current and 
internally consistent while still giving an incomplete picture of demand. This is not necessarily a broken 
data pipeline. It is a business observation made under limited availability. The revised study explicitly 
separates an incorrect inventory record from a correctly recorded stockout, because they require different 
responses. The former may justify holding an order until state is reconciled; the latter may justify 
revising the demand estimate while preserving the stockout flag as valid evidence (Wang et al., 2025; 
Little & Rubin, 2019).
Modern retailers already have access to strong forecasting and optimization methods. Probabilistic 
forecasting  models  can  estimate  distributions  rather  than  point  forecasts,  while  mathematical 
optimization can convert those forecasts into order quantities subject to capacity, budget, pack, and 
service constraints. Yet two practical gaps remain between a model output and an executable purchase 
order.
The first is a semantic gap. Business constraints are not always stored as clean parameters. A minimum 
order may be defined at supplier level rather than SKU level; a case-pack rule may use a different unit 
from the selling unit; an assortment decision may determine whether an item is eligible for a store at all; 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 6 of 115
and a temporary capacity change may arrive in a document rather than in a database field. The challenge 
is not only to read these rules, but to translate them into precise, testable constraints.
The second is an evidential gap. The optimization model normally treats its inventory position, open 
orders, prices, and sales history as facts. Research on inventory record inaccuracy shows that this 
assumption is often unsafe. DeHoratius and Raman (2008), for example, found substantial discrepancies 
between recorded and actual inventory in a large retail sample, while other work shows that even modest 
inaccuracies  can  materially  affect  automated  replenishment  decisions  (Kang  &  Gershwin,  2005; 
DeHoratius,  Mersereau,  &  Schrage,  2008).  Data-integration  research  adds  another  layer:  when 
information is assembled from heterogeneous systems, quality problems can arise through missing 
values, duplicates, failed ETL stages, inconsistent keys, stale data, or inconsistent representation (Rahm 
& Do, 2000; Woodall et al., 2016; Souibgui et al., 2019).
This dissertation argues that agentic automation in replenishment has to address both gaps. An AI system 
should not merely understand the rule and optimize the order. It should first establish whether the 
evidence on which the order is based is sufficiently trustworthy.
1.3 Operational Grounding from Retail Standards and Prior Research
The operational design of this study is grounded in a synthesis of retail standards, supply-chain research, 
and data-quality literature. The ARTS Operational Data Model provides a retail-specific view of items, 
supplier relationships, sales transactions, inventory, receipts, and transfers, and is explicitly intended to 
support integration across retail applications (Object Management Group, n.d.). GS1 standards make a 
complementary distinction between relatively stable master data, business transaction data, and time-
stamped visibility events, while the GS1 Global Data Model standardizes foundational product attributes 
used across the product life cycle (GS1, 2022, 2026). Together, these sources provide a defensible basis 
for the common entities and lineage concepts used in the dissertation's canonical schema.
The literature also suggests that the reliability of those entities cannot be taken for granted. Wang and 
Strong  (1996)  frame  data  quality  as  broader  than  accuracy  alone,  including  dimensions  such  as 
completeness,  timeliness,  and  consistency.  Research  on  ETL  and  data  integration  shows  that 
heterogeneous sources introduce duplicate records, missing values, schema conflicts, transformation 
errors, and delays (Rahm & Do, 2000; Yang, Ge, & Helfert, 2017; Souibgui et al., 2019). In retail 
operations, inaccurate inventory records are particularly important because an automated ordering policy 
can repeatedly act on a false stock position (DeHoratius & Raman, 2008).
These findings lead to three design choices that recur throughout the dissertation. First, the replenishment 
system operates on a common, versioned decision state rather than reading directly from heterogeneous 
source systems. Second, data quality is treated as an operational input to the decision rather than as a 
separate reporting concern. Third, a decision trace records not only the recommendation but also the data 
version, constraints, model outputs, and verification steps that produced it. In other words, the research 
starts from a managerial question—when should the organization trust automation enough to let it act?
—and turns that question into a technical control architecture.
1.4 The Promise and Perils of LLM Agents in Supply Chains
LLM agents are attractive in this setting because they can work across the boundary between structured 
computation and unstructured business information. ReAct demonstrated how a language model can 
alternate between reasoning and external tool use (Yao et al., 2023), while AutoGen formalized multi-


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 7 of 115
agent collaboration with different roles and tools (Wu et al., 2023). In supply-chain settings, systems 
such as OptiGuide use a language model as an interface to established optimization tools rather than as a 
substitute for them (Li et al., 2023). More recent work explores multi-agent inventory decisions, 
consensus, memory, and solver-assisted repair (Quan & Liu, 2024; Jannelli et al., 2024; Yoshizato et al., 
2026; Ao, Simchi-Levi, & Wang, 2026).
At the same time, the risks are significant. Agentic models can be inconsistent across repeated runs, can 
reproduce human-like biases in inventory decisions, and can generate convincing explanations that do 
not faithfully reflect the cause of the output (Turpin et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2025; Long et al., 2026). 
Documents supplied by external parties can also contain instructions that function as indirect prompt 
injections (Greshake et al., 2023). These limitations suggest a conservative design principle: the LLM 
should interpret and coordinate, but deterministic tools should decide whether the numbers are valid, the 
constraints are satisfied, and the action is permitted.
1.5 Problem Statement and Scope
The core problem is not to decide whether LLMs can calculate inventory orders. Mature forecasting and 
optimization systems already do that. The managerial question is whether a language-based coordination 
layer improves the quality, safety, and auditability of decisions sufficiently to justify its additional cost, 
complexity, and governance requirements. An agent may be especially useful when a supplier changes 
terms in an email or two systems provide contradictory evidence, but it may contribute little when the 
task is already covered by a reliable parser or a deterministic invariant.
The study therefore examines two forms of uncertainty together. State uncertainty concerns whether the 
system  has  a  faithful  representation  of  stock,  open  orders,  and  operating  constraints.  Demand 
uncertainty under censoring concerns the demand that cannot be observed after stockouts. These are 
not interchangeable. In M5, the former can be challenged through controlled perturbations, but natural 
stockouts cannot be verified from the public release. FreshRetailNet-50K supplies real availability 
annotations and contextual signals that make the second problem more directly testable, while still 
lacking numerical stock balances and actual purchase-order ledgers.
The formal scope is item-location replenishment with stochastic demand, lead times, order-pack and 
budget constraints, graded autonomy, and traceable decisions. M5 supports a longer-horizon, multi-store 
study of cost, service, and order variability. FreshRetailNet supports short-horizon, stockout-aware 
demand recovery and  simulated replenishment of perishables, including expiry and waste scenarios. 
Neither public benchmark identifies the true demand that went unserved during a stockout, and neither 
can establish actual commercial returns from a hypothetical alternative purchasing policy. Supplier rules, 
inventories, purchase orders, lead times, costs, shelf lives, and operational faults absent from the released 
data will be introduced transparently as experimental scenarios, not misrepresented as observed facts.
1.6 Research Questions and Hypotheses
The overall research question is: Under what conditions does an evidence-gated LLM multi-agent 
system  create  additional  operational  and  managerial  value  over  well-designed  deterministic 
automation in retail replenishment, and how does the answer change when stockouts censor 
observed demand?
The study addresses eight linked questions:


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 8 of 115
1. RQ1 — Replenishment performance: How do classical inventory policies, forecast-plus-optimizer systems, 
rule-gated automation, single LLM agents, and the full multi-agent system compare on cost, service, order 
variability, and reliability within each benchmark?
2. RQ2 — Evidence gating: Under injected inventory-state and constraint faults, does checking evidence before 
execution reduce harmful orders without imposing excessive delay or missed-sales costs?
3. RQ3 — Censored demand: On FreshRetailNet-50K, does stockout-aware demand recovery improve held-
out forecasting and downstream simulated replenishment decisions relative to using recorded sales as if they 
were unconstrained demand?
4. RQ4 — Availability versus error: Can the system distinguish valid stockout observations from corrupted 
data, and does that distinction help avoid both unsafe orders and unnecessary escalations?
5. RQ5 — Semantic value: When supplier and assortment constraints are expressed in increasingly ambiguous 
documents, what value does an LLM add beyond a capable deterministic parser using the same structured 
tools?
6. RQ6 — Multi-agent organization: Do specialized roles, typed shared state, critic checks, and constrained 
memory produce measurable benefits after accounting for latency, token cost, and coordination failures?
7. RQ7 — Trace quality: Do structured, lineage-bearing records explain which evidence and tools actually 
influenced decisions, including recovered demand and stockout information?
8. RQ8 — Managerial generalizability: Which conclusions are stable across the two datasets, and which 
depend on perishable product economics, censoring rates, time horizons, or assumptions in the simulator?
These questions lead to hypotheses that will be evaluated rather than assumed:
H1: Under clean and well-structured inputs, the full LLM architecture will not systematically beat a strong 
deterministic forecast-plus-optimizer on mean cost; any additional benefits should arise primarily in exception 
handling.
H2: Deterministic evidence gates will reduce invalid execution under detectable injected faults relative to 
ungated automation.
H3: For FreshRetailNet, properly evaluated stockout-aware demand recovery will reduce systematic 
underforecasting and improve the service–waste trade-off over raw-sales training in at least some censoring 
regimes.
H4: Treating trustworthy stockout indicators as a data fault will cause unnecessary holds; separating censoring 
from corruption will improve calibrated autonomy.
H5: A capable rules-based parser will match the LLM on templated supplier clauses, while potential LLM 
gains will become visible, if at all, on independently evaluated unfamiliar documents.
H6: Typed state and independent verification will reduce schema, unit, and execution errors relative to free-
form multi-agent conversation, at a measurable coordination cost.
H7: A lineage-rich decision trace will improve fault diagnosis and justified accept-or-override decisions 
relative to a fluent free-text explanation.
H8: The value of evidence gating will be more robust across datasets than the value of any particular LLM 
architecture; no universal superiority claim will be made unless the paired estimates support it.
1.7 Contributions and Structure
This dissertation contributes a management-oriented framework for assessing autonomous replenishment 
rather than a claim that more AI is necessarily better. It develops a standards- and literature-grounded 
data representation with explicit observed and simulated fields; adapts the same research artifact to M5 
and  FreshRetailNet-50K;  introduces  a  separate  stockout-aware  demand-recovery  workflow;  tests 
autonomy  decisions  against  data-quality  and  constraint  evidence;  and  proposes  a  reproducible 
comparison against conventional automation with economically interpretable outcomes. It also evaluates 
whether decision explanations can be replayed and audited by people responsible for purchasing.
Chapter 2 reviews operations management, data quality, censored demand, agentic AI, and human 
oversight. Chapter 3 explains how the shared data model and quality controls follow from published 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 9 of 115
retail and information-system standards. Chapter 4 defines the artifact, decision permissions, and dataset-
specific modules. Chapter 5 specifies the two-benchmark evaluation, including how FreshRetailNet's 
stockout annotations are used without claiming access to unobserved demand. Chapter 6 separates results 
already obtained in the small M5 pilot from hypotheses awaiting full evaluation. Chapter 7 addresses 
governance and limitations; Chapter 8 develops the contribution for managers and researchers. The 
appendices provide executable-study specifications, field mappings, and an evidence-status register.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 10 of 115
CHAPTER 2  Literature Review
2.1 Inventory Control Theory and the Bullwhip Effect
Inventory theory provides the economic core of this dissertation. At its simplest, replenishment balances 
the cost of holding stock against the cost of running short. In multi-period and multi-location settings, 
that trade-off becomes more difficult because today's order changes tomorrow's inventory position and 
can affect other parts of the supply chain. Clark and Scarf (1960) established important results for multi-
echelon systems, while later work consolidated practical policies such as base-stock and (s, S) control 
(Zipkin, 2000).
A second strand of literature shows why locally reasonable decisions can create instability at system 
level. Sterman (1989) demonstrated how decision delays and misperceptions generate oscillation in the 
Beer Game. Lee, Padmanabhan, and Whang (1997) described the bullwhip effect through demand-signal 
processing, order batching, rationing games, and price variation, and Chen et al. (2000) quantified the 
role of forecasting and lead time. This matters for AI-enabled replenishment because a policy should not 
be judged only by the accuracy of one order. A system that appears efficient item by item may still 
generate excessive upstream volatility.
Recent research suggests that agentic AI does not automatically remove this problem. Long et al. (2026) 
report that stochastic LLM decision-making can itself become a source of order variability, producing 
what they call an agent bullwhip effect. The implication for this dissertation is straightforward: reliability 
must be evaluated over repeated runs and over the full sequence of decisions, not inferred from a few 
plausible examples.
Lateral transshipment provides another useful control mechanism. When stores belong to the same 
network, a local shortage can sometimes be addressed by moving inventory rather than placing a new 
supplier order. Paterson et al. (2011) review a substantial literature on this topic. The simulator therefore 
allows transfers between eligible locations as a secondary action, which makes the setting closer to a 
networked retail decision than a single-stockpoint problem.
2.2 Inventory Record Inaccuracy, Censored Demand, and Data Quality
Fresh-retail  stockouts  offer  an  unusually  clear  example  of  data  that  are  accurately  recorded  yet 
decisionally incomplete. A zero in a sales record may mean that no customer wanted a product, but it 
may also mean the item was unavailable. Wang et al. (2025) document this problem in a large fresh-retail 
dataset with hourly availability indicators and show why demand recovery and forecasting should be 
treated as linked tasks. A later operational study by Azar (2026) demonstrates the value of strict train–
validation–test separation, leakage-free feature calculation, and carefully qualified profit proxies on the 
same data. These studies inform the second benchmark here, but neither directly evaluates whether a 
language-model agent improves the governance of replenishment.
The quality of the recorded state is central to automated replenishment. DeHoratius and Raman (2008) 
found that a large share of audited store-item inventory records in their retail sample differed from the 
physical quantity. Kang and Gershwin (2005) showed that such discrepancies can have an outsized effect 
on stockouts because an automated system may continue to believe that stock is available when it is not. 
DeHoratius,  Mersereau,  and  Schrage  (2008)  further  show  that  explicitly  accounting  for  record 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 11 of 115
uncertainty can improve both replenishment and audit decisions. Together, these studies justify treating 
inventory accuracy as part of the decision problem rather than as a separate control activity.
Sales data create another evidential problem. A sale records a transaction, not necessarily the full demand 
that would have occurred if stock had always been available. In lost-sales settings, demand is censored 
during stockouts, which can bias forecasts downward (Nahmias, 1994). Intermittent demand adds further 
difficulty because many item-location series contain long sequences of zeros, for which traditional 
forecasting methods can perform poorly (Croston, 1972; Syntetos & Boylan, 2005).
Information-systems research broadens the discussion beyond inventory accuracy. Wang and Strong 
(1996) argue that users assess data through dimensions including accuracy, completeness, timeliness, and 
consistency.  Data-integration  research  reaches  a  similar  conclusion  from  a  process  perspective: 
heterogeneous sources create missing values, duplicates, inconsistent representations, schema conflicts, 
and transformation failures, so data quality has to be managed throughout the integration workflow rather 
than checked only at the end (Rahm & Do, 2000; Yang et al., 2017; Souibgui et al., 2019). Woodall et al. 
(2016),  studying  ETL  deployments  in  large  organizations,  report  failures  that  affect  timeliness, 
accessibility, and representational consistency. These findings motivate the state certificate introduced in 
Chapter 4.
2.3 Probabilistic, Hierarchical, and Intermittent Retail Forecasting
The two datasets offer complementary forms of forecasting evidence. M5 contains longer, daily sales 
histories and a recognized multilevel evaluation design, which makes it useful for testing long-horizon 
inventory policies and their robustness to distribution shifts. FreshRetailNet-50K has a much shorter 
history but provides a unique availability mask that identifies which hourly observations were affected 
by stockouts. Demand recovery must therefore be evaluated separately from predictive forecasting: 
imputing a plausible value for an unobserved hour is not the same as observing the number of customers 
who would have purchased it (Wang et al., 2025).
For perishable goods, forecast bias is not merely an accuracy issue. Persistently ordering too little loses 
sales; ordering too much incurs expiry or markdown costs. The classic literature on perishable inventory 
treats finite shelf life as part of the decision problem (Nahmias, 1982). This motivates reporting waste 
and service together on FreshRetailNet, using explicit simulated shelf-life assumptions rather than 
attributing an unobserved expiry date to the source dataset.
A replenishment decision needs more than a point estimate of next week's sales. The uncertainty around 
the forecast determines safety stock, service probability, and the economic value of waiting or escalating. 
Probabilistic forecasting is therefore a better fit for the decision problem. DeepAR learns probabilistic 
forecasts across related series (Salinas et al., 2020), while the Temporal Fusion Transformer combines 
multi-horizon forecasting with variable selection and attention mechanisms (Lim et al., 2021). More 
recent time-series foundation models such as Chronos and Moirai provide useful zero-shot or lightly 
adapted baselines (Ansari et al., 2024; Woo et al., 2024).
The M5 competition is particularly relevant because it combines a large hierarchy, intermittent item-level 
sales, prices, and calendar effects. It includes 30,490 bottom-level item-store series that aggregate into 
42,840 series, and its uncertainty track evaluates multiple forecast quantiles (Makridakis, Spiliotis, & 
Assimakopoulos, 2022a; Makridakis et al., 2022b). Forecast coherence across levels also matters in 
retail: item-store forecasts should not imply totals that contradict store, department, or category forecasts. 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 12 of 115
Trace-minimization  methods  provide  one  way  of  reconciling  such  hierarchies  (Wickramasuriya, 
Athanasopoulos, & Hyndman, 2019).
In this dissertation, the language model does not calculate a forecast in prose. The forecasting component 
returns a versioned artifact containing quantiles or scenarios, calibration diagnostics, and data-quality 
flags. This separation is intentional: generative models may help select or explain a forecasting method, 
but the numerical forecast remains a tool output that can be reproduced and evaluated independently.
2.4 Tool-Augmented LLMs and Multi-Agent Coordination
LLM agents combine a language model with tools, memory, observations, and an action loop. ReAct 
demonstrated a general pattern in which reasoning is interleaved with external actions (Yao et al., 2023). 
AgentBench and AgentBoard show that performance in longer tasks depends on grounding, planning, 
and recovery from intermediate failures rather than on answer quality alone (Liu, X. et al., 2024; Ma et 
al., 2024). AutoGen provides a framework in which multiple agents can be given different roles and tool 
permissions (Wu et al., 2023).
These systems create opportunities but also new coordination risks. More agents do not necessarily mean 
better decisions. Each additional hand-off can propagate an error, create inconsistent state, increase 
latency, and make it harder to determine which component caused the final action. For a business process 
such as replenishment, the question is therefore not whether a multi-agent design is more sophisticated, 
but whether specialization produces measurable gains that justify its coordination cost.
Planning research supports a hybrid approach. LLM+P translates natural language into a formal planning 
representation and delegates search to a classical planner (Liu, B. et al., 2023). OptiGuide similarly uses 
an LLM to interact with an established optimization model rather than replacing it (Li et al., 2023). 
Simchi-Levi et al. (2025) argue for the use of LLMs as interfaces and coordinators around quantitative 
supply-chain tools. This dissertation adopts the same principle: language models handle ambiguity and 
orchestration; formal tools handle arithmetic, feasibility, and certification.
2.5 LLM Agents for Supply-Chain and Inventory Decisions
Early studies of LLM agents in supply chains show that the technology is capable of useful coordination, 
but the evidence is still emerging. InvAgent applies a multi-agent approach to inventory management 
(Quan & Liu, 2024), while Jannelli et al. (2024) study consensus-seeking among supply-chain agents. 
Yoshizato et al. (2026) report benefits from structured decision prompts and retrieval of previous cases. 
These studies support the use of specialization and memory, but they generally work in settings where 
the state and the business constraints are already clean enough to be presented to the agent.
Other studies highlight the need for stronger safeguards. AIM-Bench identifies decision biases in agentic 
inventory managers (Zhao et al., 2025). OptiRepair uses solver feedback and explicit inventory-theory 
checks to diagnose infeasible optimization models (Ao et al., 2026). The lesson is important for this 
dissertation: an LLM judge should not be the final authority on whether a replenishment plan is 
operationally valid. Validation should be expressed through tests that can be executed independently of 
the model.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 13 of 115
2.6 Explainability, Decision Traces, and Faithfulness
Business users often ask an automated system to explain why a recommendation changed. A natural-
language rationale can be helpful, but it can also create false confidence. Research on chain-of-thought 
faithfulness shows that a model can produce a fluent explanation that does not faithfully reveal the 
factors that caused the answer (Turpin et al., 2023; Arcuschin et al., 2025). This makes explanation 
quality a governance issue rather than only a usability issue.
The dissertation therefore distinguishes between a rationale and a decision trace. A rationale is text. A 
trace is a structured record of the evidence and tools used to make the decision: the snapshot, forecast 
artifact, active constraints, solver result, critic tests, approval status, and execution receipt. The text 
shown to a reviewer is generated from that record rather than treated as evidence in its own right. 
Faithfulness can then be tested by replaying the decision, removing evidence, or changing a cited factor 
and checking whether the action responds as expected.
2.7 Human–Automation Interaction and Graded Autonomy
Human-factors research has long shown that automation can be misused, disused, or over-trusted 
(Parasuraman & Riley, 1997). Parasuraman, Sheridan, and Wickens (2000) describe different levels of 
automation across information acquisition, analysis, decision selection, and action implementation. This 
framework is useful for AI governance because it avoids treating automation as a binary choice between 
manual and fully autonomous work.
The architecture in this dissertation follows that logic. A decision can remain advisory, require explicit 
approval,  execute  automatically  within  a  bounded  policy,  or—in  simulation  only—operate  fully 
autonomously. The level is recomputed for each decision. This is a meaningful departure from assigning 
a fixed autonomy level to an entire product category: the same item may be safe to reorder automatically 
on one day and require human review on another because the evidence has deteriorated.
2.8 Demand Censoring in Fresh Retail
Missing data and censored demand are related but distinct concepts. Under stockouts, the unobserved 
part of demand is influenced by the process that caused the product to become unavailable. Promotions, 
holidays, weather, and the time of day may affect both how quickly inventory is consumed and how 
much demand remains unobserved. The standard assumption that missing values can be filled without 
modelling the missingness mechanism is therefore questionable (Little & Rubin, 2019; Wang et al., 
2025).
FreshRetailNet-50K was created specifically to study this problem. Its published design contains detailed 
hourly sales, stockout status, and covariates for 50,000 store-product series. The original benchmark 
reconstructs demand during stockouts and then uses the recovered series for forecasting. The authors 
report a 2.73% improvement in their own prediction metric and a marked reduction in downward bias; 
these are findings from their study, not evidence about the multi-agent framework proposed here (Wang 
et al., 2025). Crucially, the true amount of demand during a real stockout remains unobserved, so 
recovery accuracy must also be tested on controlled masks of previously observable sales.
Research on perishable inventory adds a second dimension: the economic consequence of error depends 
on how quickly a product loses value (Nahmias, 1982). For this dissertation, expiry, purchase prices, 
shortage penalties, and order deliveries are simulation variables, while availability annotations, past 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 14 of 115
sales, promotions, and historical weather are genuine dataset fields. Keeping those  roles separate 
prevents a simulated profit measure from being misreported as a measured retailer profit.
2.9 Leakage-Free Evaluation and Counterfactual Limits
A forecast can appear to perform exceptionally well if information from the prediction period leaks into 
its features. Leakage can arise when a modeller computes store means or recent sales lags using the 
complete data file before splitting it, or when forecasts for a seven-day horizon incorporate actual sales 
from  earlier  days  of  that  same  future  horizon.  Azar  (2026)  documents  precisely  these  risks  for 
FreshRetailNet  and  provides  a  reproducible,  out-of-sample  evaluation  protocol.  The  present  study 
follows the principle of train-only feature fitting, validation-only model and policy selection, and a single 
sealed evaluation period.
The distinction between observational forecasting and counterfactual replenishment is equally important. 
Historical stockout flags were produced under a retailer's historical inventory policy. If a simulated agent 
chooses to buy more stock, the observed historical sales and stockout sequence cannot simply be 
replayed as though nothing changed. A counterfactual ordering experiment must use an explicitly 
modelled latent-demand process, and its conclusions are conditional on that model. For this reason, 
reported findings will be divided into outcomes directly measurable from the public release, outcomes 
from controlled missingness tests, and outcomes from simulated ordering interventions.
2.10 Research Gap and Two-Benchmark Contribution
Inventory theory explains how to calculate an order when the state and the rules are correctly specified. 
Data-quality research shows why such state may be unreliable. FreshRetailNet makes a separate but 
important defect observable: even a correctly stored sales figure can understate demand because a 
product was unavailable. LLM-agent research explores how language models can coordinate tools and 
actors, but it does not establish that an LLM adds value over a capable deterministic controller once the 
numerical work and data checks are held constant.
The gap addressed here is therefore  not a lack of forecasting models or agent frameworks. It is the 
absence of a controlled, management-relevant assessment that examines data validity, demand visibility, 
constraint  interpretation,  permission  to  act,  and  auditability together,  with  appropriate  non-LLM 
comparisons. Using M5 and FreshRetailNet-50K within one evidence-gated architecture tests how much 
of the proposed value persists across different information environments. The research aims to produce 
both technical evaluation and a practical adoption framework for managers who must decide when 
autonomous purchasing is warranted.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 15 of 115
CHAPTER 3  Operational Grounding: Replenishment Data in Practice
3.1 Setting and Method
The addition of FreshRetailNet-50K makes the abstraction more demanding. The canonical model must 
support one dataset with real product prices and daily unit sales and another with hourly stockout status 
and globally scaled sales quantities. It is consequently designed around a small shared set of entities plus 
documented extensions, not around an artificial claim that the two public datasets provide identical 
business information. Standard concepts provide the entities; dataset cards provide the observed fields; 
research assumptions supply only the missing information required by a controlled simulator.
This  chapter translates  the  literature reviewed in Chapter 2 into a  concrete  representation of the 
information that a replenishment system needs. It is intentionally based on published research and 
established retail data standards rather than on the internal architecture of any one company. The 
objective is not to claim that all retailers use the same database design. It is to identify a defensible 
minimum set of business objects and quality risks that recur across retail operations and that can 
therefore support a controlled research artifact.
The synthesis uses four types of evidence. First, the ARTS Operational Data Model provides a mature 
retail-specific vocabulary for items, vendors, sales, inventory, receipts, and transfers, and is explicitly 
designed to help retailers integrate operational applications (Object Management Group, n.d.). Second, 
GS1 standards distinguish master data, transaction data, and supply-chain visibility events, while the 
Global Data Model standardizes foundational product attributes and the EPCIS standard captures what 
happened, when, where, and in what business context (GS1, 2022, 2026). Third, the academic inventory 
literature identifies decision variables that matter for replenishment, including inventory position, lead 
time, demand uncertainty, pack sizes, supplier constraints, assortment decisions, and transshipment. 
Fourth, the data-quality and ETL literature identifies common risks introduced when information is 
integrated across heterogeneous systems (Wang & Strong, 1996; Rahm & Do, 2000; Woodall et al., 
2016; Yang et al., 2017; Souibgui et al., 2019).
This approach is consistent with design-science research: the artifact is built from a clearly defined 
problem environment, but the design decisions are made traceable to prior knowledge rather than 
justified through personal experience alone (Hevner et al., 2004). The resulting schema and failure 
taxonomy should therefore be read as a literature- and standards-informed research abstraction. Where 
the literature provides strong empirical evidence—such as inventory record inaccuracy—that evidence is 
cited directly. Where a failure mode is a logical implementation stress case rather than a well-quantified 
population phenomenon, it is labelled and evaluated through sensitivity analysis rather than presented as 
an observed frequency.
3.2 The Canonical Replenishment Data Model
Two further entities are necessary for the new benchmark. Availability events represent intervals during 
which an item is or is not offered for sale at a location; they are event evidence and cannot be replaced by 
a numerical stock-balance table. Perishability rules describe shelf-life assumptions, expiry or write-off 
treatment, and the economic cost of unsold stock. Availability events can be populated directly from 
FreshRetailNet's released hourly stock status, while specific shelf lives and spoilage rates must be 
generated as explicit experimental parameters. A source-type and unit-type field distinguishes original 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 16 of 115
observations from synthetic values and prevents scaled sales amounts from silently being interpreted as 
unscaled physical units (GS1, 2022; Wang et al., 2025; Nahmias, 1982).
The canonical schema is the interface through which every agent sees the retail environment. The word 
canonical is used in the integration sense: heterogeneous source representations are mapped into a 
common set of business entities before the decision process begins. The schema is not proposed as a 
replacement for ARTS, GS1, ERP, or warehouse-management models. It is a narrower research model 
assembled from concepts that recur across those standards and across replenishment theory.
ARTS supports the inclusion of retail items, item-supplier relationships, inventory, receiving documents, 
transfers,  prices,  and  sales  transactions.  GS1  supports  the  separation  of  stable  master  data  from 
transaction and visibility-event data, and provides standardized identifiers and product attributes. Retail 
assortment research adds the idea that an item-location pair may be eligible or ineligible depending on 
the planned assortment (Rajaram, 2001; Mantrala et al., 2009). Replenishment and forecasting research 
motivates time-indexed demand, inventory position, open orders, lead time, and product hierarchy. The 
resulting model is shown below.
Entity
Role in replenishment
Main literature / standards basis
Locations
Stores, warehouses, and 
fulfilment nodes; region and 
cluster membership
ARTS retail business units; GS1 location/master-
data concepts
Products and variants
SKU hierarchy, attributes, 
selling unit, lifecycle
ARTS item model; GS1 Global Data Model
Suppliers and supplier-
items
Ordering relationship, lead 
time, pack or receiving unit, 
supplier-specific identifiers
ARTS Item Supplier View; GS1 party/master-data 
concepts
Prices
Valuation, margin context, 
time-valid selling prices
ARTS price and transaction structures
Sales transactions
Observed demand signal by 
item, location, and time
ARTS retail transaction model
Purchase orders and 
receipts
Pipeline inventory, ordered 
quantities, expected or 
realized arrivals
ARTS inventory control and receiving structures
Transfers
Movement of stock between 
locations
ARTS inventory movement structures; 
transshipment literature
Inventory state and 
snapshots
On-hand quantity used for 
decisions plus a versioned 
history for replay
Inventory-control literature; GS1 visibility-event 
logic; auditability requirement of this study
Assortment / eligibility
Defines whether an item is 
legitimately ranged at a 
location during a period
Retail assortment-planning literature
Reference and policy 
data
Units, currencies, calendars, 
service targets, budgets, and 
policy versions
GS1 master-data principles; data-quality literature


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 17 of 115
Entity
Role in replenishment
Main literature / standards basis
Availability and 
stockout events
Time-stamped 
available/unavailable flags at 
item–location level; observed 
in FreshRetailNet
GS1 visibility-event concepts; censored-demand 
research (Wang et al., 2025)
Perishability and shelf-
life policies
Expiry age, carrying life, 
disposal/write-off 
assumptions; simulated in 
this study
Perishable inventory theory (Nahmias, 1982); not 
published FreshRetailNet item data
Context and demand-
recovery artifacts
Weather, activity, holidays, 
promotion factors, 
availability masks and 
inferred latent demand with 
uncertainty
Wang et al. (2025); forecast calibration and 
evidence lineage
Table 3.1. Literature- and standards-informed canonical replenishment model.
Two features of the schema are particularly important for the research design. First, it separates the 
business state from the source systems that produced it. This allows the experiment to ask whether an 
agent can make a good decision given a defined state, without tying the results to one ERP or one 
retailer's data warehouse. Second, every state is versioned. The decision trace can therefore refer to the 
exact inventory, order, price, and eligibility snapshot that was available when a recommendation was 
generated.
The structure also supports a practical distinction found in GS1's architecture: relatively stable master 
data describe products, parties, and locations; transaction data describe commercial actions; and visibility 
or event data describe what happened to objects over time. This distinction is useful because different 
quality checks apply to each class. A duplicate product identifier is a master-data problem; a missing 
receipt is a transaction problem; a stale inventory snapshot is a temporal state problem.
3.3 How Replenishment State Is Produced
FreshRetailNet introduces a second provenance requirement. Its published hourly availability mask must 
be stored with the same date and store-product identifier as the observed sales, but a recovered estimate 
of latent demand must never overwrite the observed transaction. The system needs both numbers: what 
customers actually purchased and  what the statistical model estimates they might have wanted to 
purchase under full availability. Keeping these separate makes forecast comparisons possible and allows 
a manager to see whether an order changed because the underlying data changed or because a different 
recovery model was applied.
A replenishment system rarely observes the physical world directly. Its decision state is assembled from 
systems such as point of sale, e-commerce, enterprise resource planning, warehouse management, 
supplier feeds, and planning applications. Data-integration research commonly represents this process as 
extraction from heterogeneous sources, transformation into a common structure, quality checking, and 
loading into a target analytical or operational model (Rahm & Do, 2000; Yang et al., 2017; Souibgui et 
al., 2019). The exact technology may be batch ETL, ELT, streaming, APIs, or a combination, but the 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 18 of 115
governance problem is the same: the decision system sees the result of an integration process, not the 
underlying reality.
For the purpose of this dissertation, the state-production process is represented through five general 
steps.  Master-data  alignment maps  products,  suppliers,  and  locations  into  common  identifiers. 
Transaction ingestion loads sales, purchase orders, receipts, and transfers. State construction derives 
the current inventory position and the time series used for forecasting.  Quality certification tests 
freshness, completeness, consistency, cardinality, units, and referential integrity. Versioning freezes the 
state used for a decision so that the decision can later be replayed.
This model is deliberately technology-neutral. A retailer with streaming inventory and a retailer with 
nightly batches may produce different freshness distributions, but both still face the need to know which 
sources were current, which transformations succeeded, and which version of the state informed the 
order. The simulator therefore uses daily snapshots because the M5 data are daily, not because daily 
batch processing is assumed to be universal.
3.4 A Taxonomy of State-Quality Failures
In the revised study,  genuine stockouts are not classified as data-quality failures. They are an 
observable business condition that makes demand partially unobserved. A missing or contradictory 
stockout flag, in contrast, is a data-quality problem. This distinction affects both the quality score and the 
autonomy policy: the system may proceed using a calibrated, uncertainty-aware demand estimate when 
the availability annotation is credible, but it should hold or escalate when the underlying availability 
evidence itself is inconsistent. The difference is central to FreshRetailNet-specific hypothesis H4.
The state-quality layer used later in the experiments is derived from established data-quality dimensions 
and from failures described in the inventory and data-integration literature. Rather than presenting a long 
list of company-specific incidents, the taxonomy groups failures by the business property they violate. 
This makes it more generalizable and easier to connect to measurable checks.
Failure class
Business meaning
Why it matters for 
replenishment
Research grounding
Stale or late state
Inventory, orders, or 
sales are older than the 
decision assumes
The system acts on 
yesterday's or an 
incomplete view of stock 
and demand
Timeliness in Wang & Strong 
(1996); ETL delay/failure in 
Woodall et al. (2016)
Partial refresh
Different tables refer to 
different effective times
Current sales may be 
combined with stale stock 
or open orders
ETL process-quality literature; 
consistency and timeliness 
dimensions
Missing records
Expected item, location, 
order, or transaction 
rows are absent
Demand, available 
inventory, or pipeline stock 
is understated
Completeness literature; 
Souibgui et al. (2019)
Duplicate records
The same fact is loaded 
more than once
Sales, receipts, or open 
orders are overstated
Rahm & Do (2000); Souibgui et 
al. (2019)
Referential 
mismatch
A transaction cannot be 
linked to a valid item, 
supplier, or location
Facts can be dropped, 
misallocated, or excluded 
from forecasts
Schema/integration literature; 
ARTS and GS1 master-data logic


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 19 of 115
Failure class
Business meaning
Why it matters for 
replenishment
Research grounding
Identity 
inconsistency
The same entity appears 
under different codes or 
representations
Demand histories split and 
supplier or product totals 
become unreliable
Data-cleaning literature; master-
data research
Unit or pack 
mismatch
Quantity is represented 
in a different unit from 
the one assumed
Stock, demand, or order 
quantities can be wrong by 
a conversion factor
ARTS unit-of-measure 
conversion; Das, Carrel, & 
Caplice (2021)
Currency or 
valuation 
mismatch
Cost or price uses an 
inconsistent currency or 
missing conversion
Budget and economic 
objective become 
misleading
Consistency dimension; retail 
price/master-data structures
Inventory record 
inaccuracy
Recorded on-hand 
differs from physical 
stock
Automated replenishment 
can repeatedly under- or 
over-order
Kang & Gershwin (2005); 
DeHoratius & Raman (2008)
Open-order 
uncertainty
Quantity, supplier, 
status, or expected 
arrival is incomplete or 
unreliable
Pipeline inventory is 
misrepresented and orders 
may be duplicated
Inventory-control logic; ARTS 
receiving/order structures
Historical 
restatement
Returns, cancellations, 
corrections, or late 
postings revise the past
Forecast training data and 
replayed decisions can 
change retrospectively
Transaction-processing logic; 
treated as a scenario rather than 
a population rate
Transformation 
error
A calculation or 
mapping creates an 
implausible field or 
distribution
Derived inventory or 
demand can collapse or 
inflate at scale
ETL quality literature; 
implemented as a stress case
Censored demand
Observed sales fall to 
zero because stock is 
unavailable
Forecasts can interpret a 
stockout as weak demand
Nahmias (1994); lost-sales and 
intermittent-demand literature
Table 3.2. State-quality failure taxonomy used in the research design.
The taxonomy is designed to distinguish failures that are easy to catch with deterministic checks from 
those that require contextual interpretation. Missing dates, duplicate keys, impossible quantities, and 
inconsistent units are good candidates for rules. A sudden drop in one store's activity is harder: it might 
be a  broken feed, a  store  closure, or a  genuine demand change. The  proposed architecture uses 
deterministic tests first and reserves LLM-based interpretation for the residual ambiguity. This ordering 
is important both for safety and for managerial efficiency.
3.5 A Taxonomy of Constraints as They Arrive
None of the published FreshRetailNet fields is a supplier contract, a minimum-order term, a case-pack 
specification, or a lead-time record. The constraint-extraction experiments therefore use a common, 
separately  generated  document  corpus  for  both  benchmarks.  The  corpus  will  distinguish  simple 
templates, ambiguous supplier emails, mixed-unit clauses, and contradictory workbook entries. Because 
the documents are synthetic, a successful extraction result must be described as performance on a 
controlled test set unless an independently sourced and annotated document set is subsequently added.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 20 of 115
Inventory models often represent constraints as clean mathematical parameters. Business processes are 
less tidy. Some constraints sit in master data, some in supplier terms, and some in planning documents. 
Retail standards and operations literature also show that the unit in which a retailer sells an item may 
differ from the unit in which it orders or receives it. ARTS, for example, explicitly models supplier 
receiving units and conversion rules, while research on pack sizes shows that ordering in cases rather 
than individual selling units can materially alter inventory and service outcomes (Das et al., 2021).
Constraint type
Typical representation
Formal issue created
Research basis
Pack or case 
multiple
Supplier-item master or 
ordering rule
Order quantities must be 
integer multiples
ARTS receiving units; Das et al. 
(2021)
Minimum order 
quantity / value
Supplier terms or 
contract
Creates a lower bound and 
often couples multiple 
items
Supplier-constraint and joint-
replenishment literature
Unit conversion
Master data or 
specification
Ordering, receiving, and 
selling units must be 
reconciled
ARTS unit-of-measure 
conversion; GS1 product data
Assortment 
eligibility
Range or assortment 
plan
Some item-location pairs 
should not be replenished
Rajaram (2001); Mantrala et al. 
(2009)
Lead time and 
arrival 
uncertainty
Supplier terms, order 
status, historical 
receipts
Pipeline stock arrives 
probabilistically rather 
than at a fixed date
Inventory-control literature
Supplier capacity
Allocation or temporary 
supply limit
Orders compete for a 
shared upper bound
Supply-chain optimization 
literature
Budget / open-to-
buy
Financial planning rule
Items are coupled through a 
common spend limit
Retail planning practice; 
optimization literature
Lifecycle / season 
rule
Assortment calendar or 
product status
Replenishment may stop 
even when a local model 
would otherwise order
Fashion and assortment-
planning literature
Transfer 
restriction
Network or store-cluster 
policy
Only selected location pairs 
can exchange inventory
Paterson et al. (2011)
Table 3.3. Constraint forms represented in the experimental environment.
The dissertation does not assume that an LLM should infer every business rule from free text. Where a 
constraint already exists as a structured field, the structured value is preferred. The language model is 
used when a rule must be extracted or reconciled across documents. Once extracted, the rule is converted 
into a typed object containing scope, value, unit, validity period, source, and confidence. Unit conversion 
and feasibility checks are then performed deterministically.
3.6 Decision Context Specifics
The datasets also represent different retail economics. M5 supports a longer history of replenishable 
goods in a general-purpose store hierarchy. FreshRetailNet describes short-lived, frequently restocked 
products whose available stock may be exhausted within the selling day. The fresh-retail experiment 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 21 of 115
accordingly adds availability-weighted demand recovery, shorter planning horizons, expiry decisions, 
and asymmetric shortage versus waste penalties. These are modeled scenario characteristics, not claims 
that the public release contains actual expiry outcomes.
The  literature  suggests  several  features  that  make  retail  replenishment  different  from  a  generic 
forecasting exercise. Assortment changes mean that a zero sale does not always mean zero demand; an 
item may simply not be ranged at that location. Pack sizes can force stores to hold more inventory than a 
continuous optimization model would recommend (Das et al., 2021). Inventory inaccuracy means the 
system's stock position may be uncertain. Lost sales mean demand becomes partly unobserved during 
stockouts.  Transfers create an alternative to new purchasing. Finally,  managerial overrides are not 
necessarily irrational: research on store ordering shows that local managers often modify automated 
recommendations because the formal model does not capture all operational constraints (van Donselaar 
et al., 2010).
These observations are important for the business-school framing of the study. The aim is not to 
demonstrate that a more complicated algorithm is always superior. It is to examine how an organization 
can combine formal decision support with human judgment without losing control over why a decision 
was made. The architecture is therefore evaluated not only on cost and service, but also on escalation 
quality, audit time, and calibrated trust.
3.7 Design Implications
A single abstract interface now supports two different types of evidence. M5 contributes unit sales, 
store/item hierarchies, published prices, and longer historical patterns. FreshRetailNet contributes scaled 
daily and hourly sales, availability observations, hierarchies, promotions, and weather. Both require 
synthetic  on-hand  balances,  suppliers,  open  orders,  and  decisions  to  construct  counterfactual 
replenishment experiments. The adapter for each dataset records every inferred, simulated, or missing 
field and exposes an explicit source_kind and unit_kind to downstream verification tools.
The literature synthesis leads directly to the design choices in Chapter 4. Table 3.4 makes that link 
explicit so that the architecture is traceable to prior research rather than to undocumented intuition.
Evidence from literature / standards
Design implication
Inventory records can be inaccurate 
and data quality includes timeliness, 
completeness, and consistency
Compute a state certificate before forecasting or ordering; use it in 
the autonomy decision
Retail information is split across 
master, transaction, and event data
Use a canonical schema with versioned lineage rather than allowing 
agents to read heterogeneous systems directly
ETL and integration can introduce 
missing, duplicate, late, or inconsistent 
data
Run deterministic checks on freshness, cardinality, referential 
integrity, and plausibility
Some anomalies are contextual rather 
than purely structural
Use the LLM for evidence-backed triage after deterministic checks, 
not instead of them
Pack sizes, supplier units, MOQs, and 
assortment rules alter feasible orders
Represent constraints as typed objects with units, scope, validity, and 
provenance


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 22 of 115
Evidence from literature / standards
Design implication
LLM rationales may be unfaithful
Generate explanations from a structured decision trace that can be 
replayed
Automation bias is a known human-
factors risk
Use graded autonomy, explicit holds, and auditable approval status
Table 3.4. From literature and standards to system design.
3.8 Evidence Classification: Observed, Derived, Inferred and Simulated
Claims about AI systems become hard to evaluate when observed data and experimental assumptions are 
mixed. For each item-location-day, the proposed schema therefore labels evidence as observed (released 
dataset  fields),  derived (reproducible  transformations  such as  a  daily  stockout fraction),  inferred 
(statistical  estimates  of  latent  demand,  each  with  uncertainty),  or  simulated (inventory,  supplier 
deliveries, costs, shelf life, or injected data faults). These labels persist in the lineage of forecasts, 
constraints, and final recommendations.
Business fact
M5
FreshRetailNet-50K
Research treatment
Sales and 
product/location 
identifiers
Observed daily unit 
sales
Observed normalized 
daily/hourly sales
Map with original unit and scale 
metadata
Item prices
Observed selling prices, 
at weekly grain
No unit prices in published 
fields
Use observed M5 prices; proxy 
economics for FreshRetailNet
Stockout/
availability 
indicator
Not published
Observed hourly flags and 
daily stockout-hour counts
Real mask in FreshRetailNet; 
simulator-generated in M5
Physical on-hand 
quantities
Not published
Not published
Simulated and marked as such 
in both
Suppliers, lead 
times, MOQs, 
purchase orders
Not published
Not published
Versioned synthetic 
supply/constraint layer in both
Perishability / 
shelf life / waste
Not published
Not published in public file
Optional M5 cost; explicit 
FreshRetailNet shelf-life 
scenarios
True lost demand 
during stockouts
Unknown
Unknown despite stockout 
flags
Statistically inferred; truth 
known only for artificial 
masking/simulation
Table 3.5. Evidence-status register for the two public benchmarks.
3.9 Why a Single Canonical Model Still Needs Dataset-Specific Policies
Common tables are valuable because they let the same data-quality checker, optimizer interface, critic, 
and decision-trace protocol run on both benchmarks. They do not imply identical inventory policies. 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 23 of 115
Where M5 encourages comparisons over weeks and multiple replenishment cycles, FreshRetailNet 
rewards intraday availability reasoning and a more explicit trade-off between waste and shortages. The 
artifact therefore separates portable governance mechanisms from setting-specific quantitative choices. 
A result that replicates across both settings is stronger evidence for an organisational design principle; a 
result confined to fresh retail is still valuable but should not be sold as a universal rule.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 24 of 115
CHAPTER 4  Methodology and Architecture
4.1 Research Design
The expanded evaluation uses a comparative multi-case design within the same research artifact. In the 
M5 case, the system is judged on long-horizon replenishment using observed unit sales and transparent 
supply-state simulation. In the FreshRetailNet case, it is judged first on the statistical problem of demand 
invisibility and then on the consequences of that problem for short-horizon simulated ordering. The aim 
is analytical replication: hold the governance architecture constant while varying the information and 
business context. Performance is never pooled across the datasets without a clearly defined normalized 
measure, because the quantity units, observation periods, and economic assumptions differ.
The study adopts a design-science approach because the research question is concerned with both 
understanding a managerial problem and evaluating an artifact intended to address it (Hevner et al., 
2004). The artifact is a hybrid replenishment system that combines deterministic data-quality controls, 
probabilistic forecasting, formal optimization, LLM-based interpretation, and an explicit autonomy 
policy. The objective is not to prove that one software architecture is universally optimal. It is to test 
whether this combination creates measurable value under the kinds of uncertainty and information-
quality problems identified in the literature.
The  evaluation  has  three  complementary  parts.  First,  a  closed-loop  simulator  measures  operating 
outcomes such as cost, service, stockouts, and bullwhip amplification. Second, controlled disturbance 
experiments test how the system behaves when demand, supply, constraints, or data quality deteriorate. 
Third, an audit study evaluates whether different explanation formats help human reviewers identify bad 
decisions and calibrate their trust. This mixed evaluation is appropriate for a business-school dissertation 
because technical performance alone does not establish organizational usefulness.
Development, model selection, and final evaluation are separated. Forecasting models are selected 
through rolling-origin validation. Autonomy thresholds are tuned on development scenarios rather than 
on the final test windows. All random seeds, prompt versions, model versions, solver settings, and 
disturbance parameters are logged so that results can be reproduced.
4.2 Formal Replenishment Problem
For FreshRetailNet, the mathematical program adds an age-structured inventory state and the option to 
dispose of stock that has expired. The simulator distinguishes observed sales, latent demand, available 
inventory, and  fulfilled demand. Let  D* denote latent demand,  Y observed sales, and  A the historical 
availability indicator. Historical sales satisfy Y <= D*, but D* is not revealed when A = 0. A recovery 
model  generates  a  distribution  for  the  missing  component  conditional  on  past  sales,  availability, 
promotions, holidays, and permissible weather covariates. In simulation, the policy changes available 
stock and therefore the future simulated stockout pattern; the historical availability mask is never treated 
as the outcome of a new counterfactual policy.
Fresh-retail extension (simulator definitions, not fields in the public dataset)
  H[i,l,t,a]      simulated on-hand at age a
  R[i,l,t]        simulated replenishment receipts
  D*[i,l,t]      latent demand draw (unobserved in released data)
  Y[i,l,t]       released observed, globally scaled sales
  A[i,l,t,h]     released hourly availability/stockout status
  E[i,l,t]       simulated expired quantity
  served[i,l,t] = min(D*[i,l,t], available_stock[i,l,t])


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 25 of 115
  lost[i,l,t]   = max(0, D*[i,l,t] - served[i,l,t])
  expiry[i,l,t] = quantity whose simulated age exceeds life[i]
  cost_index = purchase_index + holding_index + lost_sales_penalty
               + expiry_penalty + supplier_fixed_order_cost
  autonomy_level = policy(evidence_certificate, forecast_uncertainty,
                          business_risk, constraint_confidence)
Because  FreshRetailNet  does  not  publish  absolute  item-level  prices  or  inventory  units,  the  cost 
expression is a dimensionless indexed simulation objective, not a measured yuan or euro profit. The 
assumptions  concerning  item  life,  order  quantities,  and  penalties  are  preregistered  and  varied  in 
sensitivity analysis. M5 retains its independently specified unit-based economic simulator. Within each 
dataset, identical parameter settings and exogenous random streams are shared across policies.
The quantitative core is a stochastic replenishment model. The formulation is deliberately modular: a 
simple policy can be used for uncoupled, low-risk items, while a mixed-integer model is available when 
items  are  linked  by  supplier  minimums,  budgets,  capacity,  or  transfer  decisions.  The  important 
distinction for this dissertation is between the true state used by the simulator to evaluate an outcome and 
the observed state made available to the decision system.
Indices
  i   items              l, l' locations             s   suppliers
  t   periods            w     demand / lead-time scenarios
  c   location clusters; cl(l) denotes the cluster of location l
State
  H[i,l,t]       true on-hand inventory
  Hobs[i,l,t]    observed on-hand inventory presented to the system
  B[i,l,t]       backorders or lost-demand state
  O[i,l,s,t]     outstanding supplier orders
  e[i,l,t]       assortment eligibility in {0,1}
  q[t]           evidence / state-quality score in [0,1]
Decisions
  x[i,l,s,t]     supplier order quantity
  k[i,l,s,t]     integer pack multiplier
  z[i,l,s,t]     item-line activation
  y[i,l,l',t]    lateral transfer quantity
Representative constraints
  x = pack * k
  x <= M * e                         # order only eligible items
  supplier / order MOQ constraints
  unit-of-measure conversion constraints
  supplier capacity constraints
  budget constraints
  transfer restrictions within allowed clusters
  inventory-balance and receipt equations
Objective
  minimize expected purchase + holding + shortage + transfer + expedite cost
           + lambda * CVaR_alpha(total cost)
The CVaR term follows Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000) and gives additional weight to poor tail 
outcomes rather than optimizing only the average case. This is particularly relevant when evaluating 
agentic systems because a system with a good mean result but occasional extreme failures may be 
unacceptable in practice.
The design introduces two additional constructs. The first is the  autonomy policy, which maps the 
evidence available for a decision into a permission level:
a[t] = pi(q[t], r[t], kappa[t], sigma[t])
       in {advisory, approval, bounded, full}
q       evidence / state-quality score
r       business risk of the action
kappa   confidence in the active constraint set
sigma   forecast uncertainty


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 26 of 115
The second is  safety-adjusted utility. A policy is not rewarded simply for avoiding all risk through 
constant escalation. Escalations and holds  have  business costs as  well. The  comparison therefore 
combines expected operating cost, tail risk, the cost of escalation, and the cost of harmful executions.
U = -(expected cost + lambda * CVaR)
    - cEsc * number of escalations
    - cHarm * number of harmful executions
A harmful execution is defined only inside the simulator, where the true state is known. It is an executed 
order or transfer that violates a true hard constraint or deviates materially from the oracle decision 
because the system acted on corrupted evidence. This measure is central to RQ2.
4.3 Blackboard Architecture over a Canonical Schema
The shared objects include dataset_id, store_product_id, time_grain, source_kind (observed, derived, 
inferred, or simulated),  unit_kind,  snapshot_id, and  available_at_time. FreshRetailNet also carries 
stockout_hours, an hourly availability vector, demand-recovery model/version, and perishable-policy 
assumptions.  This  prevents  a  recovered  demand  estimate  from  being  mistaken  for  an  observed 
transaction and blocks the use of a synthetic balance as though it were a retailer-supplied stock count.
The agents share a typed, versioned decision state rather than exchanging only free-form messages. This 
pattern is sometimes described as a blackboard architecture: specialist components read from and write to 
a shared representation of the problem. In this dissertation, that shared representation is the canonical 
schema developed in Chapter 3.
The architectural choice has a governance purpose as well as a technical one. Every object contains units, 
timestamps, provenance, validity windows, and a decision identifier. Downstream tools consume those 
structured fields rather than relying on prose. A forecast produced from snapshot A cannot silently be 
combined with inventory from snapshot B. If evidence from different versions must be combined, the 
system has to record a reconciliation step.
The canonical interface is also what makes the experiment independent of any one retailer's technology 
stack. In a real deployment, ERP, WMS, POS, e-commerce, and supplier systems would be mapped into 
this layer. In the experiment, M5 and the simulator are mapped into the same layer. The agents therefore 
operate on the business concepts defined by the research design rather than on vendor-specific source 
tables.
4.4 Agents and Their Verifiable Outputs
In FreshRetailNet experiments, the Forecast Agent operates in two stages: a demand recovery stage that 
handles censored historical hours, followed by a forecast stage that predicts future demand without using 
future observed stockout labels. The State Reconciliation Agent verifies that hourly arrays and daily 
totals are well formed and that stockout flags correspond to the intended time interval. The Critic treats a 
reliable, recorded stockout as information about the measurement process—not automatically as a broken 
feed. The Orchestrator records whether a decision was based on raw sales, a particular recovery model, 
or a recovery model that failed calibration checks.
Specialization is used only where it creates a clear separation of responsibility. Each agent has a 
narrowly defined role and must produce a machine-checkable output before the workflow can proceed.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 27 of 115
Agent
Business responsibility
Required verifiable output
State Reconciliation and 
Data-Quality Agent
Establishes whether the 
decision state is usable
State certificate with freshness, completeness, 
consistency, invariant results, and unresolved 
anomalies
Demand Forecast Agent
Produces the demand 
distribution used for 
planning
Forecast artifact with quantiles/scenarios, 
calibration metrics, feature window, and model 
version
Supplier and Constraint 
Agent
Converts supplier, 
assortment, and policy rules 
into structured constraints
Typed constraint set with scope, unit, source, 
validity, and confidence
Replenishment 
Optimization Agent
Generates economically 
efficient feasible plans
Candidate actions, objective breakdown, active 
constraints, solver status, and certificate
Risk and Critic Agent
Independently challenges the 
proposed action
Pass, veto, or escalate decision with explicit test 
results
Orchestrator and 
Autonomy Agent
Controls workflow and 
determines what the system 
is permitted to do
Committed decision and autonomy level, or an 
escalation packet
Execution and 
Monitoring Agent
Executes approved actions 
and records outcomes
Idempotent execution receipt and subsequent 
outcome events
Table 4.1. Agent roles and required outputs.
The architecture deliberately avoids giving the LLM final authority over facts that can be checked by 
code. The State Agent cannot simply declare a feed reliable; it must return the results of the tests. The 
Optimization Agent cannot claim feasibility without a solver status. The Critic cannot rewrite the 
proposal in place; it can only raise an objection that causes the proposal to be revised and checked again. 
This separation is intended to reduce the risk that a persuasive language-model response becomes a 
substitute for verification.
4.5 Coordination Protocol
The workflow follows a simple sequence:  OBSERVE → CERTIFY STATE → FORECAST and 
GROUND  CONSTRAINTS  → PROPOSE  → VERIFY  → COMMIT  → EXECUTE  → 
MONITOR. Forecasting and constraint grounding can run in parallel once the state has been certified. 
The system does not proceed to an executable proposal when the state contains an unresolved hard 
failure.
Each stage has an explicit entry and exit condition. Typed schemas are validated before a hand-off. Units 
are normalized. Tool calls use idempotency keys where duplication would be harmful. Timeouts, retry 
budgets, and maximum dialogue turns prevent open-ended agent conversations. Agents have allowlisted 
tools and limited write permissions. These controls are ordinary software-engineering mechanisms, but 
in an agentic architecture they also serve as governance controls because they restrict what the model is 
capable of changing.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 28 of 115
If the language model is unavailable, the system can fall back to a deterministic baseline policy, provided 
the state certificate passes. This is an important operational principle: the organization should not make 
continuity of routine replenishment dependent on the availability of a generative model.
4.6 State Reconciliation and the Data-Quality Score
For the fresh-retail case, the certificate has two independent dimensions. Measurement integrity checks 
whether the time index, hourly array length, sales values, category identifiers, and availability flags are 
valid.  Demand visibility describes the fraction of the recent history affected by stockouts and the 
uncertainty of the recovery model. A high stockout fraction can increase forecast uncertainty without 
implying that the source record is corrupt. Only failed measurement-integrity checks trigger a hard state 
hold; high, but credible, censoring can instead lead to wider forecast intervals, tighter spending caps, or 
planner approval.
The state certificate is computed over the exact evidence needed for a decision. It therefore does not ask 
whether the entire enterprise data warehouse is healthy; it asks whether the inventory, open orders, sales 
history, price, and eligibility used for this order are sufficiently reliable. The certificate covers the 
following families of checks:
Freshness: whether each relevant source is recent enough for the decision horizon.
Completeness: whether expected item-location, order, and reference records are present.
Continuity: whether the historical series contains unexpected gaps.
Cardinality and uniqueness: whether duplicate facts or orders are present.
Referential integrity: whether products, suppliers, and locations resolve correctly.
Units and ranges: whether quantities, prices, and conversion factors are plausible and compatible.
Cross-source consistency: whether overlapping sources disagree beyond an allowed tolerance.
Movement consistency: whether the change in stock can be reconciled with sales, receipts, and transfers.
Distribution shifts: whether a transformation failure has created an implausible system-wide change.
Censoring flags: whether sales observations coincide with stockout periods.
Each test returns pass, warning, or hard failure together with evidence. Warnings are combined into a 
quality score; a hard failure can force a hold regardless of the numerical score. The LLM may then help 
interpret warnings that require context—for example, whether a sudden disappearance of transactions is 
more consistent with a closed store or a broken feed—but it cannot directly change the underlying data or 
override a hard failure. Its interpretation is recorded as a hypothesis, not as a new fact.
4.7 Constraint Extraction and Verification
The Supplier and Constraint Agent converts relevant rules into a standard representation containing the 
affected entity, scope, parameter, value, unit, conversion, aggregation level, effective period, source 
reference,  precedence,  and  confidence.  Structured  source  fields  are  preferred  over  generated 
interpretation. LLM extraction is used mainly for prose or semi-structured documents.
The process is retrieve → extract → normalize → validate → cross-check → commit or escalate. 
Normalization and dimensional analysis are deterministic. A case-pack rule must produce an integer-
multiple constraint. A supplier unit must convert into the retailer's order unit through an explicit factor. A 
minimum that applies across a supplier order must not be silently converted into a per-item minimum. If 
the unit, scope, or validity interval cannot be resolved, the system escalates rather than guessing.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 29 of 115
This design is deliberately conservative. In business terms, a wrong interpretation of a supplier rule can 
create a direct financial or contractual consequence. The architecture therefore treats low-confidence 
constraint extraction as a reason for human review, not as a request for the LLM to "try harder."
4.8 Forecasting Module
FreshRetailNet  adds  specific  recovery  candidates:  a  raw-sales  baseline;  an  availability-weighted 
historical-rate estimator; an interpretable recovery model that adjusts hourly demand using comparable 
in-stock periods; and one learned temporal method such as TimesNet or a suitably resourced alternative 
drawn from the original benchmark (Wang et al., 2025). A Tobit-style or inverse-Mills-based recovery 
serves as an econometric or heuristic comparator following Azar (2026). Each method is evaluated first 
under artificial censoring of selected formerly in-stock periods, where the withheld sales provide a 
measurable target, and then by its ability to improve held-out forecasts. The study will not report ground-
truth recovery accuracy for real stockout periods because their true unmet demand is unobserved.
Future weather is particularly vulnerable to leakage. Historical weather can be used to fit a model; at a 
forecast origin, only observed weather up to that date, an explicit weather forecast available at that time, 
or a calendar-conditioned climatology may enter the future horizon. Released evaluation-period weather 
is not silently used as if it had been forecast in advance. Known promotional plans and calendar holidays 
may be used prospectively only when their availability before the forecast origin is justified.
Forecasting  models  are  trained  and  compared  through  rolling-origin  validation.  Candidate  models 
include seasonal naive methods, Croston-style approaches for intermittent demand, LightGBM quantile 
regression, DeepAR, the Temporal Fusion Transformer, and pretrained Chronos or Moirai models. 
Model  selection  can  be  global,  category-specific,  or  ensemble-based  depending  on  validation 
performance.
The Forecast Agent returns probability information rather than a single best guess: at minimum a 
median, service-relevant upper quantiles, scenario samples, calibration coverage, and the version of the 
data  used.  Where  stockout  flags  indicate  censored  observations,  the  pipeline  applies  a  lost-sales 
correction or marks the forecast as lower-confidence. Higher-level forecasts are reconciled with item-
store forecasts so that the hierarchy remains coherent.
Importantly, this dissertation does not depend on a claim that a foundation model will outperform 
established forecasting methods. Time-series foundation models are included as contemporary baselines. 
The research question concerns the decision system around the forecast, not a competition to identify one 
universally best forecasting architecture.
4.9 Optimization and Policy Tools
Fresh-retail replenishment includes two practical policy classes that are especially relevant when full 
mixed-integer optimization would be expensive or unnecessary: an order-up-to rule based on lead-time 
demand and an age-aware newsvendor policy balancing expected shortage against expiry. Both are 
implemented in deterministic code and compared against the larger optimizer using the same recovered 
or raw demand distribution. This allows the study to test whether improvements come from de-
censoring, from a more sophisticated ordering policy, or from the LLM coordination layer. If a simpler 
policy matches the agent, that finding is recorded as a business-relevant outcome rather than treated as a 
failed experiment.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 30 of 115
The optimization layer selects the simplest appropriate method. For an uncoupled item with a clear state 
and straightforward pack constraint, a policy calculator may be preferable to a full mathematical 
program. When supplier minimums, shared capacity, budgets, or transfers link several items or locations, 
a mixed-integer model is used.
The LLM does not calculate the objective value or certify feasibility. It supplies a validated problem 
specification to the optimization tool and interprets the result for the workflow. If the model is infeasible, 
solver diagnostics are used to identify conflicting constraints. The agent may suggest a resolution, but a 
constraint that comes from an authenticated contract or policy cannot be relaxed automatically. This 
follows the solver-in-the-loop principle used in work such as OptiRepair (Ao et al., 2026).
4.10 Evidence-Gated Autonomy and Safety Controls
Two forms of caution must not be confused. A corrupted feed can make a specific order unjustifiable, 
whereas a genuine stockout means the business has learned that observed sales are censored. The 
autonomy policy uses both integrity and visibility indicators: hard integrity failures stop automated 
execution; high uncertainty in recovered demand can downgrade execution to bounded or approval-gated 
mode. A reliable stockout flag by itself does not block an order. Otherwise the system would repeatedly 
refuse to replenish precisely the products most likely to need replenishment.
The architecture uses four levels of autonomy. Advisory means the system proposes an action but cannot 
submit it.  Approval means a user must accept or modify the proposal.  Bounded autonomy allows 
automatic execution within predefined limits.  Full autonomy is reserved for simulation or tightly 
controlled testing.
The autonomy level is recomputed for each decision using the evidence-quality score, action risk, 
constraint confidence, and forecast uncertainty. A routine low-value  order with fresh data, stable 
demand, and high-confidence constraints may qualify for bounded execution. The same item can be 
downgraded to approval if the inventory snapshot is stale or a supplier rule has changed. A hard state 
failure results in a hold and an escalation packet.
A hold is not assumed to be costless. Delaying an order can itself create a stockout. The policy therefore 
includes a hold budget and an urgency mechanism: if uncertainty persists, the system escalates rather 
than simply doing nothing indefinitely. The experiments vary this budget to quantify the trade-off 
between avoiding a wrong order and delaying a necessary one.
Hard controls include spend limits, maximum deviation from a deterministic reference policy, maximum 
days of supply, eligibility checks, pack-integrality checks, duplicate-order prevention, policy-version 
pinning,  approval  requirements  for  high-risk  actions,  least-privilege  tool  access,  and  immutable 
execution receipts. External documents are treated as data, not as instructions to the agent.
4.11 Native Structured Decision Trace with Lineage
The trace includes, when applicable, a distinct  demand recovery block: the published stockout-hour 
count and availability mask, the pre-recovery observed sales, the recovery algorithm and version, the 
inferred demand distribution, uncertainty intervals, the forecast origin, and the evidence-access cut-off. 
The consumer sees both the raw and adjusted forecasts and can identify how much an order changed 
because of the recovery assumption. The simulator's counterfactual demand generation is labelled 
separately and never described as an observed retailer outcome.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 31 of 115
Every recommendation creates a structured decision record. This is not a transcript of hidden reasoning. 
It is an audit object composed of observable inputs, tool outputs, tests, and approvals. A human-readable 
explanation is generated from that record after the decision has been assembled.
9. Identity and timing: decision identifier, item-location-supplier, timestamp, policy version, and granted 
autonomy level.
10.
Lineage: state version, source freshness, invariant results, quality score, and unresolved anomalies.
11.
Evidence: source identifiers or hashes, reconciliation results, forecast version, quantiles, and uncertainty 
status.
12.
Constraints: normalized values, units, scope, source, validity interval, confidence, and whether the 
constraint was active.
13.
Alternatives: candidate order and transfer quantities, cost and service trade-offs, and rejected options.
14.
Verification: critic tests, stress checks, vetoes, revisions, and residual uncertainty.
15.
Commit and execution: approval or override, idempotency key, execution response, and later outcome 
events.
A trace is considered complete only if the final action can be reconstructed from the referenced state, 
constraints, and tools with pinned versions. This requirement turns explainability into a testable property 
rather than a stylistic feature.
4.12 Common Decision Workflow, Two Dataset Adapters
The artifact follows one sequence in both cases: ingest → validate provenance → certify measurement 
integrity → assess demand visibility → forecast and ground constraints → optimize → verify → assign 
autonomy → log and (in simulation) execute. What changes is the adapter. The M5 adapter supplies 
daily unit sales, store-item price and calendar information. The FreshRetailNet adapter preserves hourly 
arrays, stockout status, promotional and environmental covariates, and scaled-quantity metadata. For 
reporting, every decision is accompanied by a machine-readable statement of the dataset fields actually 
used and the synthetic assumptions introduced.
This design deliberately avoids presenting multi-agent orchestration as a forecasting method in itself. 
The same approved forecast and constraint set can be passed to a deterministic controller and to an LLM-
based controller. Only then is it possible to attribute differences in decision quality, exceptions, cost, 
latency, and explanation to the orchestration architecture rather than to different information or a stronger 
underlying forecast.
4.13 Study Controls and Governance Before Evaluation
Both benchmarks follow a frozen configuration manifest containing source version, file hashes, allowed 
feature  timestamps,  recovery  model,  forecast  model,  supply  parameters,  policy  thresholds,  seeds, 
prompts,  parser  rules,  simulator  version,  and  evaluation  windows.  The  held-out  portion  of 
FreshRetailNet is not consulted to adjust prices, model weights, threshold rules, shelf lives, or policy 
selection. Any changes after inspecting final evaluation results will be documented as exploratory and 
checked  on  a  new,  unexamined  setting  where  feasible.  Approval-gated  execution  is  simulated 
throughout; the study does not submit purchase orders to a real retailer.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 32 of 115
CHAPTER 5  Experimental Design and Evaluation Protocol
5.1 Research Logic: A Comparative Two-Benchmark Evaluation
The purpose of using two datasets is not to make one enormous pooled forecasting experiment. M5 and 
FreshRetailNet-50K represent different information environments. M5 provides a long daily series, a 
standard retail hierarchy, and price information but no direct stockout observation. FreshRetailNet 
provides a short but information-rich history of fresh-retail sales, annotated hourly stockouts, and 
contextual covariates. Both permit the evaluation of an evidence-gated decision architecture, but each 
provides a different test of why that architecture might be useful. The first setting emphasizes state and 
supplier-constraint  failures;  the  second  allows  an  additional  investigation  of  demand  that  goes 
unobserved during genuine stockouts.
The study applies the design-science logic of building and evaluating an artifact (Hevner et al., 2004). 
The core artifact is held as stable as possible: a canonical schema, integrity certificate, typed constraints, 
forecast tool, deterministic  optimizer, critic, autonomy policy, and decision trace. Dataset-specific 
models are explicitly interchangeable components. M5 tests whether the governance layer remains 
reliable over longer replenishment sequences. FreshRetailNet tests whether it reacts appropriately when 
the observations are valid but the sales signal is censored. The resulting design is better suited to a 
business-school dissertation because it addresses a decision that managers actually face: where to invest 
in AI, data quality, and oversight when classical automation already works reasonably well.
Design dimension
M5 track (Track M)
FreshRetailNet track (Track F)
Real public 
observations
Daily unit sales, product/store 
hierarchy, weekly prices, 
events
Daily and hourly scaled sales, hourly stockouts, 
categories, promotions, weather, holidays
Time span
1,941 public daily 
training/evaluation history 
days
90-day training file and a separate 7-day evaluation 
file
Retail decision
General replenishment, 
optional inter-store transfers, 
cost/service over repeated 
cycles
Fresh replenishment, stockout recovery, service–
waste trade-off under simulated shelf lives
Best supported 
additional question
Does verified state and 
constrained ordering reduce 
harmful actions?
Does credible stockout evidence change forecasts 
and approval-worthy orders?
Shared experimental 
inputs
Synthetic inventory, 
suppliers, ordering terms, 
budgets, delivery uncertainty, 
injected state faults and 
constrained document corpus
Claim permitted
Comparative simulated 
operational performance; 
descriptive M5 pilot already 
available
Observed stockout/censoring patterns plus 
simulated operational consequences; experiments 
planned


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 33 of 115
Table 5.1. Complementary contributions of the two evaluation tracks.
In both tracks, the central experimental contrast is the full multi-agent proposal against a  capable, 
verified non-LLM controller with identical forecasts, optimization tools, and input constraints. The 
design also compares both against less capable baselines and deliberately defective variants. This avoids 
the common mistake of crediting an LLM for the benefits of a better forecast, a different optimizer, or 
data-quality checks that conventional software could have performed.
5.2 Evidence Boundaries and Outcome Categories
Before any model is trained, every field used in the study is classified as observed, derived, inferred, or 
simulated. The released data are immutable inputs. Observed sales are never overwritten with recovery 
estimates, and simulated purchase prices are never represented as published business transactions. This is 
recorded in the experiment manifest and repeated in the lineage of every decision. An additional 
distinction separates  actual historical stockout observations from synthetic stockout outcomes created 
when a simulator changes orders.
Outcome claims are separated into three tiers.  Tier A covers data properties and predictive tests 
measurable from public observations, such as whether a future unstocked interval was flagged or how a 
forecast performs on held-out in-stock hours.  Tier B covers controlled masking experiments where 
otherwise observed sales are hidden according to stockout-like patterns, so that the artificially withheld 
observations  supply  a  valid  target  for  evaluating  a  recovery  model.  Tier  C covers  simulated 
counterfactual purchasing, where cost, lost sales, expiration, and the effect of different autonomy rules 
are  identified  only  within  the  assumptions  of  the  simulator.  A  Tier  C  result  may  be  practically 
informative, but it is not a measured uplift in a real retailer's revenue.
5.3 Track M: M5 Data, Preparation and Temporal Protocol
The M5 competition dataset contains daily sales of 3,049 products in ten stores in three U.S. states, 
yielding 30,490 item-store series and 42,840 series after hierarchical aggregation. The released sales 
history covers 1,941 days, with a calendar of events and weekly selling prices (Makridakis et al., 2022a, 
2022b). This remains the long-horizon benchmark. The data are converted from wide daily columns into 
an  item-store-date  panel  while  preserving  the  original  day  index,  category/department  hierarchy, 
store/state structure, price availability, and calendar features.
For the confirmatory extension beyond the existing pilot, use chronological rolling origins with at least 
one  untouched  final  evaluation  period.  Features,  data-quality  thresholds,  model  selection,  supply 
parameters, and autonomy thresholds are fit or fixed on earlier windows only. The forecast horizon is 28 
days for standard M5-style accuracy comparisons; replenishment simulation is evaluated daily across 
repeated decision windows using forecasts that would have been available at each origin. The choice of 
simulation window and the number of origins must be pinned before the final run. The initial M5 pilot 
involved only three selected FOODS items across ten stores and two seeds; it is preserved as preliminary 
engineering evidence and is not treated as representative of the full M5 hierarchy.
The  release  contains no physical stock balances, supplier arrivals, or direct stockout annotations. 
Historical M5 sales therefore serve as an observed-sales demand proxy for the simulation, with the 
limitation that stockout censoring may be present but cannot be directly identified. All initial balances, 
receipts, transfers, supplier capacities, and data-quality perturbations are synthetic and versioned. The 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 34 of 115
same  exogenous  scenario  draws  and  demand  stream  are  used  for  every  policy  within  a  paired 
comparison.
5.4 Track F: FreshRetailNet-50K, Provenance and Published Structure
FreshRetailNet-50K was released by Dingdong in 2025 as a benchmark for recovering demand hidden 
by stockouts (Wang et al., 2025). The downloaded revision contains 50,000 store–product series, 898 
stores, 18 cities and 865 distinct product IDs. The paper identifies 863 SKUs and the card 865; this study 
records  both  source  claims  and  uses  the  865  IDs  present  in  revision 
08c1fab7f9257bc73679d415d65d644165d351d4.
The official public card lists 4,500,000 rows in train and 350,000 in eval, corresponding to 90 training 
days and a held-out seven-day evaluation period for each of 50,000 series. The files are available as 
Parquet from the publisher's Hugging Face repository and are licensed under CC BY 4.0. They contain 
no published on-hand inventory balance, supplier contract, lead time, wholesale cost, physical shelf life, 
purchase order, or quantity supplied. The authors describe the underlying collection systems, but those 
source systems are not part of the released research dataset (Dingdong-Inc, 2025; Wang et al., 2025).
The  daily  and  hourly  sales  fields  are  reported  as  amounts  multiplied  by  a  global  normalization 
coefficient. Their magnitude should not automatically be interpreted as the physical number of discrete 
cartons, bottles, or kilograms sold. The simulator therefore declares a normalized unit system for Track F 
and provides explicit sensitivity checks for scaling and rounding. It reports service rates, forecast error, 
waste ratios, and indexed cost rather than claiming to recover actual monetary profit. Without an 
authenticated conversion factor and observed purchase economics, absolute financial comparability with 
M5 is not scientifically justified.
The publisher’s implementation and released arrays confirm that 1 means out of stock. The 16 operating-
hour slots run from 06:00 through 21:00. In training, 19.8771% of operating hours are flagged and 
44.2668% of daily rows have at least one stockout hour. Daily stockout counts match the sums of hourly 
flags. These percentages describe different denominators, and neither reveals the unobserved quantity of 
lost demand.
5.5 Field-Level Mapping of FreshRetailNet to the Canonical Schema
The source fields are mapped without losing their meaning or provenance. The date and store-product 
identifiers form a daily observation key, while an optional hourly child table stores each hour's recorded 
sales and stock status. Category hierarchies and city-to-store relationships are native to the dataset. 
Promotions and weather are retained as covariates, not converted into procurement constraints. The 
resulting schema supports both recovery-aware forecasting and state-verification experiments.
Published fields 
(FreshRetailNet)
Canonical object
Transformation / quality assertion
city_id, store_id
Locations and geography
Pseudonymous city/store identifiers; verify each 
store's city mapping


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 35 of 115
Published fields 
(FreshRetailNet)
Canonical object
Transformation / quality assertion
management_group_id, 
first_category_id, 
second_category_id, 
third_category_id, 
product_id
Product and category 
hierarchy
Preserve the original five-level product/category 
hierarchy; verify keys and parent consistency
dt
Observation timestamp
Parse source date; assert chronological order and 
expected day count per series
sale_amount
Observed sales (daily)
Keep globally normalized scale metadata; compare 
against sum of hourly values within tolerance
hours_sale
Observed sales (hourly child 
records)
Explode only when needed; inspect vector length, 
valid range and day/hour alignment
hours_stock_status
Availability-event child 
records
Verify source flag polarity and temporal alignment; 
never equate it to numeric inventory
stock_hour6_22_cnt
Daily availability summary
Check count in 0–16 range and consistency with the 
relevant hourly flags
discount, activity_flag
Promotion and activity 
covariates
Preserve rate semantics (1.0 = no discount); mark 
availability of future plans explicitly
holiday_flag
Calendar covariate
Known calendar event; do not recode as source 
inventory
precpt, 
avg_temperature, 
avg_humidity, 
avg_wind_level
Environment covariates
History observed; future values allowed only as 
genuine or simulated ex-ante forecasts
Recovered-demand 
output (not a source 
column)
Inferred latent-demand 
artifact
Model/version, interval, uncertainty and source 
mask; preserve raw sales separately
Stock, suppliers, orders, 
lead times, unit prices, 
expiry (not source 
columns)
Simulated 
inventory/supply/expiry 
objects
Label source_kind=simulated and record scenario 
generator, assumptions, seed
Table 5.2. Field-level canonical mapping for the published FreshRetailNet-50K files.
Exact duplicate keys, contradictory hierarchy assignments, impossible discount values, inconsistent daily 
versus hourly totals, unavailable status coding, and cross-split time overlap are treated as integrity 
concerns. Genuine stockouts are not. When a test introduces a false stockout flag or removes an 
availability interval, that is a separate synthetic data-quality disturbance, labelled differently from an 
actual stockout recorded by the source.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 36 of 115
5.6 Leakage-Free Temporal Splits and Feature Availability
The executed protocol retains the official 90-day training split and sealed seven-day evaluation. Four 
expanding validation folds begin at day indices 62, 69, 76 and 83. Panel membership uses only the first 
62 days. Forecast selection uses pooled fully stocked validation WAPE; recovery selection uses pooled 
artificial-mask hourly MAE. Both selections are saved before final evaluation is opened.
All per-store, per-product, category, regional, day-of-week, and hourly-profile statistics are fitted from 
rows strictly preceding the relevant validation origin. Later rows must not affect earlier fitted transforms. 
Seven-day multi-step predictions are recursive: predicted values, not evaluation actuals, populate later 
forecast lags. Recovered latent-demand values for the training period are produced by recovery models 
fitted on the training portion of each fold, not on the full 97-day release.
The same timing rule applies to covariates. Calendar holidays can be genuinely known in advance. 
Promotional or activity plans are permitted in the future only if a realistic pre-decision schedule is 
specified; otherwise the experiment uses a train-only forecast or a known/unknown-information ablation. 
Future realized weather cannot be used as a forecast unless the experiment is explicitly labelled an 
oracle-covariate upper bound. Historical hourly stockout masks are allowed as training evidence; actual 
future masks are forbidden as planning inputs and are reserved for evaluating observational forecast 
behaviour.
An automated leakage audit reruns forecasts after changing or scrambling evaluation-period targets and 
asserts that predicted values are unchanged. Similar tests apply to withheld future stockout flags and 
future observed weather. Each result records the latest permissible source date, fitted feature artifact 
hashes, model version, and frozen policy settings. Failure of an audit invalidates the run rather than being 
reported as superior predictive performance.
5.7 Study F1: Recovering Demand Hidden by Real Stockouts
FreshRetailNet makes visible a measurement problem that M5 cannot isolate directly. Let y_i,t,h be 
observed scaled sales and  a_i,t,h an indicator that the store-product was available at hour  h. Let 
d*_i,t,h denote latent demand, which is not published. For completely available hours, observed sales 
may be used as a demand proxy subject to ordinary measurement limits. During out-of-stock hours, the 
unserved portion of demand cannot be measured. A recovery model estimates a conditional distribution 
for the missing part and records its uncertainty. The adjustment is made in a distinct field; it never 
changes the published observed sale.
Observed historical sales:       y[i,t,h]
Verified historical availability: a[i,t,h]  {available, unavailable}
∈
Unobserved latent demand:        d*[i,t,h] (not published)
Estimated latent demand:         d_hat[i,t,h] ~ p(d* | past y, a, context)
Recovered training target:       y if available; d_hat if censored
Important: observed availability does NOT provide the quantity of lost sales.
True latent-demand recovery error is measurable only for artificially
masked in-stock observations or for synthetic simulation ground truth.
The executed recovery comparators are no imputation, a train-only in-stock hourly profile and historical 
LightGBM regression. The regression is named accurately; Tobit, TimesNet and the other ambitious 
candidate models were not executed within this budget. Each model fits before its validation origin. 
Published sales remain unchanged, with recovery estimates stored separately.
The identifiable recovery test hides deterministic contiguous blocks of 2, 4 and 8 operating hours on 
originally fully stocked validation days. The hidden values and original full daily amount are withheld 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 37 of 115
from reconstruction inputs. Saved outputs measure hourly and daily MAE, WAPE and signed bias with 
explicit denominators. The masks use reproducible hash ranking; they do not claim to reproduce the full 
empirical distribution of natural stockouts. These are point estimates, without an asserted interval-
calibration result.
The second evaluation tests the practical forecasting consequence: does training on recovered daily 
histories improve seven-day-ahead forecasts on held-out  uncensored observable outcomes relative to 
training on raw sales? Report results separately for in-stock evaluation hours/days and all observed 
evaluation sales, because the latter remains censored. The third evaluation checks plausibility and 
sensitivity on true historical stockout windows, but does not claim ground-truth reconstruction where no 
demand was measured. Sensitivity bounds, model disagreement, and plausible peak-hour shapes are 
more defensible than calling one imputation the actual sales the retailer lost.
5.8 Study F2: Forecasting with Censored and Recovered Histories
The four executed forecasts are seasonal naive, LightGBM on raw sales, LightGBM on hourly-profile 
recovered history and LightGBM on learned recovered history. LightGBM variants use the same 150-
estimator budget and historical lag, date and series features. Recursive forecasts use predictions for later 
lags.  Future  realized  weather,  promotions  and  stockout  masks  are  excluded.  TFT,  DeepAR  and 
prediction-interval calibration were not executed for this new holdout.
Final results separately score all recorded daily sales and fully stocked daily outcomes, using WAPE, 
MAE and signed bias with their denominators. Every frozen candidate remains visible. True lost demand 
is unavailable during natural stockouts, so a higher prediction cannot be labelled proven recovery of real 
lost sales. Published-paper results remain literature evidence.
M5 retains its own probabilistic forecasting experiments with appropriate daily features and 28-day 
horizon, including seasonal naive, gradient boosting, and stronger candidate models if compute permits. 
There is no requirement that the best forecasting model be identical across the two benchmarks. What 
must remain identical are the provenance labels, evaluation discipline, governance gates, critic rules, and 
attribution logic used to compare the agent with deterministic automation.
5.9 Study F3 and Track M: Closed-Loop Replenishment Simulators
Historical records describe decisions made under the original retailer's stocking policy. Our research asks 
what would have happened if a different controller had purchased more or less stock. These are 
counterfactual questions and cannot be answered by simply replaying historical sales and stockouts 
unchanged. The study therefore uses closed-loop simulators in which the controller's orders alter future 
simulated on-hand stock. Demand, arrivals, sales, expiry, stockouts, and costs then evolve under an 
identical environment for every policy being compared. A simulator oracle can evaluate unsafe actions 
because it can observe its own true state; the real datasets do not contain that oracle.
For M5, the simulator is initialized after a warm-up period using lead-time demand and specified service 
targets. Supplier assignments, lead times, open orders, capacity, MOQ and pack rules, budgets, and 
optional inter-store transfers are synthetic. The sequence of daily decisions produces on-hand stock, 
pipeline inventory, fulfilled sales, lost sales, transfers, and costs. M5 observed unit sales act as an input 
demand proxy, with stockout-censoring limitations stated. The state perturbation layer changes the 
observed evidence available to the controller without changing the simulator's true state.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 38 of 115
The bounded experiment gives competing policies a common observed-sales-proxy demand stream. It 
does not use one recovered arm’s estimates as evaluation truth. The core adapter scales published 
normalized sales by 100 for inherited order-tool compatibility. The independent continuous calculator 
experiment tests common demand multipliers of 1, 1.25 and 1.5. Each policy’s orders create new 
simulated availability; historical stockout masks are not replayed as outcomes under the changed 
stocking policy.
The core physical environment uses FIFO expiry and a hypothetical three-day life, while its inherited 
MILP remains age-unaware. A separate calculator experiment varies life across 1, 3 and 7 days, raw and 
recovered forecast views, demand multipliers and 30 seeds. Its continuous quantities and dimensionless 
cost coefficients differ from the core, so absolute outcomes are not pooled. These assumed lives are not 
measured Dingdong product attributes.
Simulator setting
Track M
Track F
Observed or assumed?
Decision cadence
Daily
Daily; optional intraday 
sensitivity
Study choice
Horizon
Multi-week; consistent 
with M5 evaluation
Seven days; 1–3 day reorder 
sensitivity
Study choice
Demand driver
Public daily observed 
unit sales proxy
Train-only estimated latent 
demand with real historical 
availability patterns used 
for fitting
Observed input / inferred 
counterfactual
Inventory and 
receipts
Simulated
Simulated
Not released in either 
benchmark
Expiry and 
spoilage
Optional sensitivity only
Age-based stock disposal 
and penalties
Fully simulated; no actual waste 
in public data
Economic 
valuation
Synthetic procurement 
and operating costs, 
optionally informed by 
observed selling prices
Dimensionless indexed 
costs; scaled-quantity 
caveat
Assumed, not company P&L
Table 5.3. Disclosed differences between the two counterfactual replenishment environments.
5.10 Versioned Supply, Constraint, Assortment and State-Quality Layers
The simulator contains three versioned disturbance families, largely retained from the original M5 design 
and now applied consistently to both datasets. The supply and constraint layer generates product-to-
supplier  assignments,  pack  multiples,  individual  and  supplier-aggregate  MOQs,  unit  conversions, 
optional capacity cuts, uncertain arrivals, and budget limits. The assortment layer generates temporal 
product-location  eligibility  while  keeping  the  product  hierarchies  and  observed  source  identifiers 
unchanged. The  integrity layer introduces  feed gaps, partial refresh, duplicate  ingestion, missing 
location mappings, inconsistent units, contradictory purchase-order fields, or false stockout flags into the 
controller's observed state while retaining the simulator's true state.
Failure-class frequencies are not described as estimates from private operational telemetry. Instead, the 
taxonomy follows the information-systems and inventory literature reviewed in Chapters 2 and 3, while 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 39 of 115
magnitudes are defined as transparent low, medium, and high stress levels. Classes without defensible 
empirical prevalence assumptions are tested as explicit rare events. Every scenario records the fault, 
onset, duration, magnitude, detection signal, and expected business impact. A successful integrity 
certificate can therefore be audited against the known perturbation that created the test.
The new FreshRetailNet track requires an additional distinction. A real, published stock_hour6_22_cnt > 
0 is an  observed censoring event, not an integrity disturbance. Synthetic corruption of that count, a 
contradictory hourly mask, or removal of the mask is a state-quality disturbance. The experiment tests 
whether the gate responds differently to the two cases. Genuine high censoring may rationally lead to 
broader uncertainty intervals or human approval; it should not automatically be treated as proof that data 
ingestion failed.
5.11 Policies, Agent Ablations, and Attribution Controls
To isolate where value is created, the full system is not compared only with a deliberately weak LLM. 
The main control is an engineered deterministic system that sees the same evidence, invokes the same 
forecasting models and solver, and applies the same state checks. A more elaborate model should justify 
its  complexity  through  improvements  on  independently  evaluated  semantic  exceptions,  lower 
unnecessary escalation, better audits, or stronger performance under difficult scenarios.
ID
Controller / policy
Contribution isolated
B1
Seasonal naive + base-stock / 
order-up-to
Transparent minimum standard
B2
Gradient-boosted forecast + 
(s,S) or newsvendor
Stronger model with simple deterministic policy
B3
Probabilistic forecast + 
stochastic optimizer
Forecast-and-optimization without evidence gate or 
LLM
B4
B3 + deterministic integrity 
checks, parser, and recovery 
gate
Capable non-LLM control (primary comparison)
B5
Time-series foundation / 
advanced candidate + 
transparent policy
Value of forecast model complexity
B6
Single LLM agent with the 
same tools
Effect of role specialization
B7
Multi-agent system using 
free-form messages
Value of typed messages and provenance
B8
Typed multi-agent system 
without an independent critic
Critic's incremental contribution
B9
Typed multi-agent + critic 
with fixed autonomy
Evidence-gating effect
B10
Full typed, verified, evidence-
gated LLM architecture
Proposed artifact including decision traces


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 40 of 115
ID
Controller / policy
Contribution isolated
B11 (Track F)
B4 with correct stockout-
aware recovery but no LLM
Demand-recovery value separately from AI 
coordination
Table 5.4. Baseline policies and ablations; B11 is a FreshRetailNet-specific non-LLM comparator.
Track F evaluates policies under both  raw-sales forecasting and  recovered-demand forecasting. This 
creates a paired two-factor design: recovery on/off and LLM coordination on/off, while holding forecast 
family and optimization tools fixed. It can establish whether any improvement is a statistical benefit from 
de-censoring, an independent benefit from language-based exception handling, or an interaction between 
the two. For document interpretation, the deterministic parser must cover all known templates and be 
given comparable access to validation rules. The LLM is challenged on held-out semantic forms, not 
merely rewarded for handling examples that the parser was deliberately prevented from reading.
5.12 FreshRetailNet-Specific Experiments and Test Matrix
The six FreshRetailNet questions guide different forms of evidence. F1 and F2 receive masking and 
holdout forecasting tests. F3 and F6 receive independent age-aware simulations and sensitivity. F4 
receives a targeted stockout-gate mechanism ablation. F5 receives a parser-versus-LLM factorial using 
shared forecasts and tools. The full architecture suite, independent natural supplier documents and human 
study remain outside the completed scope.
Experiment
Controlled comparison
Primary question and metric
F1. Recovery validity
Raw sales vs exposure 
correction vs regression/Tobit 
vs learned recovery
Artificial-mask WAPE/WPE and interval coverage; 
no claim of real latent-demand ground truth
F2. Forecast value
Identical forecast model on 
raw vs recovered training 
histories
Seven-day held-out forecast bias, WAPE, pinball 
loss, censoring-stratified results
F3. Ordering 
consequences
Same deterministic controller 
with raw vs recovered 
demand
Simulated cost index, fill, shortage, expiry waste, 
sensitivity to assumed shelf life
F4. Correct gating
Integrity gate that incorrectly 
blocks any stockout vs 
censoring-aware gate
Unnecessary holds, unsafe executions, service 
effects, escalation precision
F5. Agent value
Capable parser/controller vs 
single LLM vs full multi-agent 
on the same cases
Semantic extraction accuracy, harmful orders, run 
variance, audit quality, cost/latency
F6. Domain stress
Promotion peaks, weather 
uncertainty, perishability, 
lead-time and supplier 
disruptions
Robustness of rankings, CVaR, worst-case loss, 
oversight workload
Table 5.5. FreshRetailNet research questions; executed coverage and remaining gaps are documented in Chapter 6 
and Appendix C.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 41 of 115
F1 provides identifiable recovery targets only when sales are artificially hidden from originally available 
periods.  F2 evaluates actual released sales, stratified by whether their own observation window was 
stocked; real lost demand remains unidentified.  F3 changes stocking policy in a simulator and is 
consequently  a  statement  about  the  simulated  demand  model.  F4 is  a  particularly  direct  test  of 
managerial governance: does a system confuse valid evidence of unavailability with invalid evidence? 
F5 determines whether there is any gain from the language model after a strong deterministic system 
already receives the recovered demand. F6 tests whether such conclusions survive reasonable variations 
in the business economics.
The experiments are preregistered with an explicit primary outcome per contrast. A favourable result on 
one metric does not justify an unqualified conclusion if it increases waste, causes more approval 
bottlenecks, or relies on unrealistic generator assumptions.
Executed coverage of the FreshRetailNet questions
Question
Completed evidence
Remaining gap
F1 recovery
Artificial masking; 
zero/profile/LightGBM point estimates
Natural lost-demand truth, 
TimesNet/Tobit and calibrated intervals
F2 forecasting
Four candidates, four validation folds, 
seven-day holdout
Full-population modeling and 
probabilistic TFT/DeepAR comparisons
F3 perishable decisions
Independent continuous calculator grid; 
explicit conservation
An age-aware version of the inherited 
core MILP
F4 valid availability
60 targeted gate-ablation runs
Human interpretation and production 
exception costs
F5 LLM attribution
Shared-tool parser/LLM record-repair 
factorial
All semantic difficulty levels and 
raw/recovered-forecast factorial variants
F6 sensitivity
Shelf lives 1/3/7, common demand 
multipliers 1/1.25/1.5
A complete economics, cadence and 
disruption sensitivity study
Human audit
No participants; machine audit of records
Measured review speed, trust and staff 
effort
5.13 Operational, Forecasting and AI Governance Metrics
The study reports multiple outcomes because the management decision is inherently multi-objective. For 
forecasting, the shared metrics are WAPE, signed WPE, probabilistic pinball loss, interval coverage, and 
category/store-stratified calibration. M5 adds the competition-relevant hierarchical scales and WRMSSE 
where suitable. FreshRetailNet adds artificial-mask recovery accuracy, bias under varying censoring 
intensity, stockout-hour exposure and the proportion of the horizon with reliable observations. A reported 
forecast error always identifies whether the target is recorded sales, an artificially hidden originally 
observed value, or simulator-generated latent demand.
Operational metrics comprise fill rate, service probability, stockout incidence, mean and tail total cost, 
inventory turns, days of supply, and order amplification. FreshRetailNet additionally reports perishable 
expiry share, waste-to-fulfilled-demand ratio, the shortage–waste frontier, and simulated normalized cost 
per  store-product-day.  Its  costs  are  indexes  determined  by  specified  simulation  coefficients;  M5 
economic results are also model-dependent but have observed physical sales units and published prices 
that allow a more interpretable unit basis. No raw comparison of M5 dollars with FreshRetailNet 
normalized costs is presented.
Governance metrics comprise invalid or harmful executions relative to the simulator oracle, hard-
constraint violations, holds caused by real faults, holds caused by genuine stockouts, false escalations, 
missed dangerous actions, decision latency, cost of review, valid tool-call rate, number of agent turns, 
run-to-run variance, token  usage  and estimated  operating cost.  The  study distinguishes  successful 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 42 of 115
verification from correct AI semantic choice. For instance, a critic can block an incorrectly requested 
repair, demonstrating that the safety architecture succeeded even though an LLM made a poor choice.
Construct
Primary reported metric
Interpretation safeguard
Forecast quality
WAPE, WPE, pinball loss
Label evaluated target and observable/censored 
population
Demand recovery
WAPE on artificially masked 
in-stock hours
Do not present real lost-demand accuracy as 
observed
Operational value
Cost index, fill rate, expiry 
ratio, CVaR
All procurement economics are simulated; indexed 
cost for FreshRetailNet
Evidence gating
Harmful execution and false-
hold rates
Separate genuine stockouts from corrupted 
availability records
LLM incremental value
Paired B10–B4 benefit net of 
tokens and latency
Matched tools, forecasts, constraints and scenarios
Audit usefulness
Correct accept/override rate 
and audit time
Randomized explanation conditions where 
approved
Table 5.6. Primary outcomes and restrictions on interpretation.
5.14 Decision-Trace Faithfulness and Stockout Evidence
Every trace identifies the data snapshot, time cutoff, item-store key, source type, observations used, 
forecast version, estimated uncertainty, constraint sources, feasible alternatives, critic checks, autonomy 
decision and simulated execution receipt. Track F requires a separate stockout-evidence block containing 
the historical hourly availability mask, out-of-stock-hour count, raw observed sales, recovery model, 
fitted training interval, recovered demand distribution and the amount by which recovery changed the 
proposed purchase. A reader must be able to distinguish what the retailer recorded from what the model 
inferred.
Replay  tests  determine  whether  pinned  evidence,  tool  versions,  and  seeds  reproduce  the  action. 
Counterfactual tests modify one factor at a time: demand quantile, budget, supplier capacity, shelf life, 
availability integrity, or recovery uncertainty. A good trace does not merely state that stockouts matter; it 
must indicate whether changing the censoring information actually changes the recommendation or its 
autonomy  level.  Deletion  tests  remove  a  piece  of  claimed  decisive  evidence  and  check  that  the 
explanation is not contradicted by an unchanged decision. This evaluation concerns verifiable external 
decision artefacts, not access to the hidden internal reasoning of a neural network.
5.15 Robustness Scenarios, Distribution Shift and Business Risk
Track  M  retains  the  original  scenarios  for  normal operations,  feed gap,  partial  refresh, duplicate 
ingestion, capacity cut, supplier failure, unit mismatch, aggregate MOQ change, assortment change, 
extreme demand and transfers. Track F adds genuine late-day stockout pressure, promotion-induced 
demand spikes, weather uncertainty, sudden demand changes, high censoring, short shelf life, excessive 
waste penalty, delayed morning replenishment, and corrupted or absent availability annotations. Each 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 43 of 115
scenario has a documented frequency or is explicitly designated as an artificial stress case. The same 
perturbation seed and true simulator state are applied to all policies in a paired comparison.
To  separate  generalization  from  overfitting,  the  final  evaluation  reports  results  for  both  common 
scenarios and dataset-specific scenarios. A system that succeeds only when no meaningful disturbances 
occur should not be described as robust. Equally, a system that avoids every harmful order by refusing all 
decisions may sacrifice too much service to be commercially useful. The principal business trade-off is 
therefore between the expected cost of unnecessary action, the cost of missed action, and the cost of 
human intervention.
5.16 Sampling, Statistical Analysis and Confidence
Thirty matched seeds describe conventional-policy variability conditional on one panel, origin and 
assumed world. The live factorial has seeds 13 and 29. Days, SKU rows and cached responses are not 
independent  replications.  All  seed  rows  and  descriptive  contrasts  are  available;  no  confirmatory 
significance, noninferiority or population-precision claim is made.
The completed grid contains 360 conventional core runs, 32 live factorial runs, 1,080 independent 
calculator sensitivity runs and 60 gate ablations. Each run uses 30 series over seven days. The numerical 
grid’s 30 seeds do not create 30-seed evidence for the two-seed LLM comparison.
Cross-dataset synthesis uses the direction, effect sizes and uncertainty of  standardized within-dataset 
contrasts, not a false common monetary scale. A finding is marked stable if it is supported across 
plausible scenario settings and both information environments; otherwise the report explains which 
conditions appear to drive it. The existing M5 v2 pilot had just two independent seeds and thirty hand-
selected series, so it supplies engineering evidence only and receives no post hoc confirmatory p-value.
5.17 Human Audit and Management Decision Study
Subject to the institution's approval and feasible recruitment, planners or graduate students with relevant 
operations coursework will evaluate a balanced set of decision packets. Packets span both datasets and 
include correct recommendations, decisions based on a corrupted state, errors in an extracted constraint, 
and high-censoring FreshRetailNet cases where a valid stockout should not be mistaken for a data 
failure. Participants receive three explanation forms in randomized order: free-form LLM rationale, 
structured trace without provenance and stockout detail, and the full lineage-bearing evidence trace.
The main outcomes are time to decision, correct accept/override classification, detection of invalid state 
and inappropriate autonomy, calibrated confidence, and perceived effort. Cases are counterbalanced 
across participants to reduce learning effects. The study will make clear that the stockout and inventory 
values presented in simulated purchase packets may combine genuine historical availability records with 
hypothetical inventories and prices. Sample size will be determined using a pilot and feasible effect-size 
assumptions; no human-study outcome is asserted before recruitment and approval.
5.18 Implementation Protocol, Reproducibility and Stop Rules
The implementation is divided into an ingestion layer, a measurement-and-provenance layer, recovery 
and forecasting tools, a versioned simulator, policy controllers, decision traces and an analysis layer. 
Track M uses the existing M5 ingestion and pilot harness. Track F adds a source adapter for the 
publisher's Parquet files, checks the released schema and status coding, builds daily/hourly views, creates 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 44 of 115
train-only transforms, and produces recovered-demand and uncertainty artifacts. The same verified 
controller interface is reused wherever the business decision is comparable.
The technical run manifest stores dataset repository/version or file hashes, timestamp cutoffs, code 
revision, model and prompt versions, source-unit treatment, simulator parameters, LLM temperature and 
retry policy, seeds, available compute, and all generated artifact IDs. An experiment stops with an 
explicit error when there are inconsistent hourly arrays, a broken chronology, forbidden feature leakage, 
unsupported unit conversions, missing policy inputs, or invalid solver certificates. The final audit report 
lists every failed or excluded run and the reason; it never silently drops failures from a denominator.
The full 4.85 million daily-row release is checked for integrity. Modeling and closed-loop conclusions 
use a frozen 30-series panel selected from first-62-day sales and censoring evidence. The sample is 
balanced across three historical censoring strata by deterministic ranking and covers 0.06% of series. It is 
computationally purposive rather than representative.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 45 of 115
CHAPTER 6  Experimental Findings and Managerial Implications
6.1 What Has Actually Been Measured: M5 v2 Pilot
A preliminary M5 engineering pilot was completed before the present dual-dataset redesign. The pilot 
report, dated 8 October 2026, records 32 completed simulated runs, 448 decision traces, 68 captured 
model attempts and approximately 69,073 model tokens. The source panel comprises 30 item-store series
—three selected FOODS products across ten stores—and two independent simulation seeds. It is not a 
random or representative sample of the full M5 hierarchy. The evaluation uses artificial supplier 
constraints,  simulated  inventory  and  state  perturbations,  and  14-day  decision  windows.  These 
characteristics limit the strength and scope of the findings (M5 v2 Pilot Report, 2026).
The first important descriptive result is negative: the LLM controller and a capable deterministic parser 
achieved identical cost and fill-rate outcomes in every matched scenario at the two tested recovery 
settings. This does not establish that language models are always redundant. It means that the specific 
controlled supplier grammar and decision setting used in this pilot did not demonstrate additional 
economic value from the language model. That finding strengthens the rationale for testing genuinely 
different semantic difficulty levels, including unfamiliar and conflicting documents, in the expanded 
experiment.
The second result concerns the recovery architecture, not the LLM. Under an injected derived-inventory-
field collapse, adding an evidence-based recovery path reduced mean simulated operating cost from 
894.30 to 796.51 (an improvement of about 10.9%) and increased fill rate from 89% to 96% (7 
percentage points). The same benefit was obtained by the deterministic-parser controller. The appropriate 
conclusion is therefore that observable-evidence recovery was useful under that tested fault—not that an 
LLM created the benefit. The report records zero hard-constraint violations among committed plans in 
the model-enabled arms, reflecting the protections of the wider controlled system.
A third result reveals a weakness that a high extraction score could hide. The LLM recovery selector 
made the desired tool-selection choice on only 10 of 20 fresh choices and requested inappropriate 
recovery on ten stale-feed decisions that required a hold. A separate verification tool rejected those 
attempted repairs and prevented unsafe continuation. This illustrates why semantic competence, tool-
selection reliability and execution safety must be measured separately. It also gives the two-dataset 
design a clear falsifiable proposition: a more sophisticated agent should be judged not just by whether it 
reads a number correctly, but by whether it calls the right tool and respects a decision's evidence 
threshold.
Finding
Observed pilot result
Permissible conclusion
LLM versus capable 
parser
Same matched simulated cost 
and fill results
No incremental LLM value shown in this controlled 
corpus
Recovery under 
inventory-field collapse
Cost 894.30 
 796.51; fill 89% 
→
 96%
→
Benefit attributed to verified recovery, not uniquely 
to LLM
Hard-constraint 
verification
Zero committed-plan hard 
violations in model-enabled 
arms
Safety checks worked under the tested scenarios, 
not universal proof


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 46 of 115
Finding
Observed pilot result
Permissible conclusion
LLM recovery tool 
choice
10/20 correct; wrong repairs 
blocked
Verification prevented harm despite semantic 
selection errors
Scope
32 runs, two seeds, three 
FOODS items, ten stores
Exploratory engineering evidence only
Table 6.1. Status and limited interpretation of the completed M5 v2 pilot.
An earlier M5 stage also completed 372 runs: 360 numerical controls over seven days and 30 seeds, eight 
two-day prose-feasibility runs, and four two-day structured controls. The stages are not pooled. The first 
96 numerical runs used seeds 0–7; a later 264-run extension used seeds 8–29 after that batch completed. 
The pooled 30-seed numerical means are therefore exploratory historical descriptions. The initial live 
prose experiment held every decision and therefore did not demonstrate an operational LLM saving. Its 
evidence motivated the bounded semantic-head and verified-repair improvements subsequently evaluated 
in V2.
In the initial feed-gap numerical controls, B3 committed 63 actual hard-constraint violations while B4 
committed none and held 90 of 210 decision days. This supports a safety role for the evidence gate, with 
an explicit delay trade-off. These are original M5 results; the FreshRetailNet portability failure described 
next shows why a threshold should not be transferred without checking the new quantity scale.
Historical M5 numerical means: seven days, 30 seeds per cell
Policy
Scenario
Simulated USD
Fill
Violations
Held days
B1
Inventory-field 
fault
621.07
92.8%
0
0
B1
Stale feed
443.18
90.8%
0
0
B1
Normal
399.85
92.0%
0
0
B2
Inventory-field 
fault
548.97
85.2%
0
0
B2
Stale feed
440.07
77.2%
0
0
B2
Normal
399.63
81.0%
0
0
B3
Inventory-field 
fault
497.05
93.7%
0
0
B3
Stale feed
425.57
90.3%
63
0
B3
Normal
375.36
94.0%
0
0
B4
Inventory-field 
fault
369.42
90.5%
0
90
B4
Stale feed
367.80
90.5%
0
90
B4
Normal
374.00
93.9%
0
0
6.2 FreshRetailNet: observed evidence and simulated outcomes
FreshRetailNet changes the study because it provides a type of business evidence that M5 does not: real 
recorded availability by hour. Under M5 alone, the simulator can create stockouts and evaluate how 
controllers respond, but any claim about the historical occurrence of unobserved retail demand is largely 
assumption-based. In FreshRetailNet, the existence and timing of many stockouts are documented in the 
public record, even though their unserved quantities are not. The evaluation can therefore ask whether a 
manager's view of demand improves when the information system uses availability flags correctly, and 
whether that changes the decisions the manager is asked to authorize (Wang et al., 2025).


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 47 of 115
The completed checks show why a valid stockout flag calls for a different response from a broken feed. 
Correct availability evidence can limit what sales reveal. Demand recovery therefore supplies a separate 
inference.  An  inventory-field  failure  is  instead  held  or  reconciled  through  permitted  source  and 
movement evidence. The following results retain that distinction.
Results table. Completed scope
Experiment
Series
Seeds
Days
Runs / decisions
Core numerical policies
30
30
7
360 / 2520
Matched parser/LLM 
factorial
30
2
7
32 / 224
Age-aware sensitivity 
grid
30
30
7
1,080 runs
Stockout-gate 
mechanism ablation
30
30
7
60 runs
Forecast final holdout
30
Not simulation seeds
7
210 targets × 4 methods
Results table. Selected panel by first 62-day censoring stratum
Stratum
Series
Mean hourly stockout share
Mean normalized sales
0
10
12.43%
0.6318
1
10
18.31%
0.6352
2
10
33.61%
0.4843
Figure 6.1. Historical availability is observable; lost demand is not. Training population rates use 72 
million operating-hour flags and 4.5 million daily rows. The selected-panel rate uses its first 62 training 
days. Daily and hourly percentages have different denominators. None measures the quantity of naturally 
lost demand.
The original gate did not transfer successfully. Its inherited autonomous spending cap was 1,500 cost-
index points, while a clean proposed FreshRetailNet order could require about 1,656 points. In the 
primary normal parser condition, 14 of 14 decision days were held. This failure is reported before any 
repair: an architecture can be computationally feasible and still be commercially inactive if its threshold 
is carried into a new quantity scale without checking.
6.3 Demand recovery, forecast performance and perishable decisions
The saved recovery and forecast results are leakage-checked and reported below. Artificial masking 
supplies known targets; natural stockouts do not. Validation chose raw-history LightGBM for forecasting 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 48 of 115
and the hourly LightGBM model for recovery before the final holdout was read. Every alternative 
remains in the tables. The selected recovery method’s modest hourly MAE advantage does not establish 
reliable reconstruction of naturally lost demand.
A planner needs more than an accuracy ranking. Under the default independent age-aware setting, 
recovered forecasts modestly reduced indexed cost and improved fill, while increasing expiry per 
demand. Some other cells increased cost. The service–waste frontier and sensitivity table therefore show 
a conditional trade-off, rather than an unconditional return from recovery.
Results table. Pooled artificial-mask operating-hour recovery
Method
N predictions
MAE
WAPE
Signed bias
Hourly LightGBM
6930
0.04230
98.33%
-83.10%
Hourly profile
6930
0.05815
135.18%
10.50%
No recovery
6930
0.04302
100.00%
-100.00%
Results table. Pooled daily reconstruction from artificial masks
Method
Masked cases
WAPE
Signed bias
Hourly LightGBM
1485
25.80%
-24.32%
Hourly profile
1485
19.62%
3.07%
No recovery
1485
29.26%
-29.26%
Figure 6.2. Recovery accuracy where a target can actually be checked. Originally observed sales are 
hidden in 2-, 4- or 8-hour validation blocks. Models fit only earlier data. The target is deliberately 
withheld sales, rather than unobserved natural stockout demand. Mask cases overlap and are not 
independent retailers.
Results table. Final seven-day forecast scores
Method
Target
N
WAPE
Bias
LightGBM, learned 
recovery
All sales
210
40.26%
-1.16%
LightGBM, learned 
recovery
Fully stocked
114
38.95%
7.11%
LightGBM, profile
All sales
210
40.61%
6.96%
LightGBM, profile
Fully stocked
114
40.07%
11.49%
LightGBM, raw
All sales
210
40.41%
-2.86%
LightGBM, raw
Fully stocked
114
38.84%
5.93%


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 49 of 115
Method
Target
N
WAPE
Bias
Seasonal naive
All sales
210
45.63%
2.61%
Seasonal naive
Fully stocked
114
42.84%
13.02%
Figure 6.3. Forecast quality depends on which sales are observable. All four frozen forecasts cover the 
same 30 series and seven-day holdout. All-day sales can be censored; fully stocked days are 
conditionally observable. Future masks, weather, promotion and actual sales are never forecast features.
Figure 6.4. The holdout forecast is made before the seven-day window. Panel aggregate predictions are 
made at the final training origin. Later forecast lags use predictions. Globally normalized sales are 
neither physical quantities nor a currency.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 50 of 115
Figure 6.5. Historical censoring changes the forecasting problem. Ten series per stratum, defined before 
evaluation using the first 62 training days. Errors are weighted by the sum of actual scored sales within 
each group. Evaluation availability selects the fully stocked scoring subset only; it does not change 
membership or forecasts. These small strata are descriptive.
Results table. Core numerical means; counts summed across 30 seeds
Scenario
Policy
Cost index
Fill
Stockout
Violations
Held days
Normal
B1
18,290.32
77.6%
28.8%
210
0
Inventory-field 
fault
B1
18,610.24
78.5%
27.1%
266
0
Stale feed
B1
19,447.74
75.7%
30.0%
209
0
Normal
B2
19,685.44
69.7%
35.6%
190
0
Inventory-field 
fault
B2
19,172.46
72.9%
32.1%
204
0
Stale feed
B2
22,377.34
65.3%
39.3%
190
0
Normal
B3
18,794.03
85.0%
20.1%
0
0
Inventory-field 
fault
B3
19,026.79
85.0%
20.0%
0
0
Stale feed
B3
19,607.02
83.3%
21.7%
0
0
Normal
B4
24,013.14
43.5%
57.7%
0
210
Inventory-field 
fault
B4
24,013.14
43.5%
57.7%
0
210
Stale feed
B4
24,013.14
43.5%
57.7%
0
210
Results table. Actual violations and clean-reference flags are different endpoints
Policy
Rule checks violated
Reference-only 
flagged days
Nonzero action days
Held days
B1
685
7
630
0
B2
584
80
630
0
B3
0
380
630
0
B4
0
0
0
630
Results table. Failed active constraint checks in naive requested plans
Policy
Supplier capacity
Maximum order
Budget
Total checks
B1
623
14
48
685
B2
550
0
34
584


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 51 of 115
Figure 6.6. Conventional policies establish a demanding baseline. Thirty seeds per policy and scenario. 
Error bars show one standard deviation across conditional simulation seeds. B1: seasonal base-stock; B2: 
LightGBM (s,S); B3: native GRU-NB with MILP; B4: B3 with an evidence gate. Physical stock expires 
by FIFO, while the inherited MILP remains age-unaware.
Figure 6.7. A safe hold has a service cost that should be measured. Counts are summed across 30 runs 
per cell. Hard violations use actual active constraints and differ from clean-reference deviations. Holds 
count decision days. A low violation count should be assessed alongside service.
Results table. Independent sensitivity means; full grid in CSV
Calculator
History
Life
Demand×
Cost index
Fill
Expiry share
age_aware
raw
1
1.0
444.2409
87.0%
45.1%
age_aware
raw
1
1.25
490.2626
82.1%
35.3%
age_aware
raw
1
1.5
571.9640
76.2%
28.0%
age_aware
raw
3
1.0
250.8000
96.5%
12.0%
age_aware
raw
3
1.25
303.3008
92.1%
6.6%


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 52 of 115
Calculator
History
Life
Demand×
Cost index
Fill
Expiry share
age_aware
raw
3
1.5
387.9095
86.5%
4.0%
age_aware
raw
7
1.0
208.4383
96.4%
0.7%
age_aware
raw
7
1.25
278.1695
92.1%
0.6%
age_aware
raw
7
1.5
372.4381
86.5%
0.5%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
1
1.0
445.3558
87.5%
45.5%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
1
1.25
489.5699
82.7%
35.6%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
1
1.5
570.7272
76.7%
28.3%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
3
1.0
251.1878
96.7%
12.4%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
3
1.25
300.5691
92.6%
7.0%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
3
1.5
383.2645
87.1%
4.3%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
7
1.0
206.3261
96.7%
0.7%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
7
1.25
273.6730
92.6%
0.5%
age_aware
selected_recove
ry
7
1.5
366.4855
87.1%
0.5%
order_up_to
raw
1
1.0
472.5299
79.4%
46.2%
order_up_to
raw
1
1.25
534.9456
74.6%
36.8%
order_up_to
raw
1
1.5
625.4762
69.2%
29.6%
order_up_to
raw
3
1.0
233.4785
91.6%
6.9%
order_up_to
raw
3
1.25
325.7840
84.4%
4.1%
order_up_to
raw
3
1.5
454.8281
76.1%
3.2%
order_up_to
raw
7
1.0
216.0284
91.6%
0.8%
order_up_to
raw
7
1.25
314.9469
84.5%
0.6%
order_up_to
raw
7
1.5
445.4677
76.3%
0.6%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
1
1.0
472.4809
80.0%
46.4%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
1
1.25
534.1117
75.1%
37.1%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
1
1.5
626.0210
69.5%
30.1%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
3
1.0
232.0698
92.1%
7.5%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
3
1.25
321.5021
85.0%
4.4%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
3
1.5
448.5044
76.8%
3.3%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
7
1.0
213.4033
92.1%
0.8%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
7
1.25
310.4848
85.0%
0.6%
order_up_to
selected_recove
ry
7
1.5
439.5487
76.9%
0.6%


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 53 of 115
Figure 6.8. Fresh retail exposes a service–waste trade-off. Independent calculator experiment, with 30 
shared seeds per cell and demand multiplier 1. Shelf lives are hypothetical. Quantity and economic 
conventions differ from the core MILP experiment, so their absolute results are not pooled.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 54 of 115
Figure 6.9. Demand recovery must earn its keep under different assumptions. Relative change from raw 
to recovered forecast history within each common-demand cell. Thirty seeds, shelf lives 1/3/7 days and 
demand multipliers 1/1.25/1.5. Negative values mean lower assumed indexed cost. They are not 
measured profit or purchasing savings.
6.4 The incremental contribution of the LLM
The live factorial found identical cost and fill in 16/16 matched parser–LLM pairs. Supplier texts remain 
synthetic and controlled. The model’s participation demonstrates bounded execution with numerical 
tools and independent verification, but no additional economic advantage over a capable parser on these 
texts.
A retailer still needs evidence that language assistance resolves exceptions that its rules cannot handle 
economically. Checked interpretation and exception coordination are plausible benefits. Inference delay, 
monitoring, failures and oversight are incremental costs. The audit retains erroneous choices even when 
independent tools prevent unsafe execution. Semantic accuracy and final execution safety are separate 
endpoints.
Results table. Agent factorial means; two seeds per row
Arm
Scenario
Cost index
Fill
Held days
Violations
Freshcalls
Parser
Normal
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
Parser
Inventory-field 
fault
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
Parser
Stale feed
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
Parser
Capacity cut
21,572.97
57.4%
4
0
0
Parser + repair
Normal
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
Parser + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
Parser + repair
Stale feed
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
Parser + repair
Capacity cut
21,572.97
57.4%
4
0
0
LLM
Normal
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
7
LLM
Inventory-field 
fault
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
LLM
Stale feed
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
0
LLM
Capacity cut
21,572.97
57.4%
4
0
5
LLM + repair
Normal
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
7
LLM + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
6


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 55 of 115
Arm
Scenario
Cost index
Fill
Held days
Violations
Freshcalls
LLM + repair
Stale feed
23,331.29
45.2%
14
0
6
LLM + repair
Capacity cut
21,572.97
57.4%
4
0
5
Results table. Primary execution and reference-distance flags
Arm
True rule checks 
violated
Reference-only 
flagged days
Nonzero action days
Held days
LLM
0
10
10
46
LLM + repair
0
10
10
46
Parser
0
10
10
46
Parser + repair
0
10
10
46
Figure 6.10. The LLM shares the same forecasts, tools and safeguards. Four matched controller/repair 
configurations, four scenarios and two seeds, each using seven days. Repair is verified inventory-record 
reconciliation. It is not statistical recovery of censored customer demand. All configurations share the 
numerical tools and source evidence.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 56 of 115
Figure 6.11. Inference is an additional operating burden. Primary registered study physical attempts from 
the independent audit. The exploratory follow-up has separate counts. Cache imports and typed 
extraction outputs are not additional calls. Local API charges are zero; CPU hosting and oversight costs 
are unpriced.
6.5 Evidence gating, record repair and useful holds
Under the injected inventory-field fault, enabling repair changed mean LLM-arm cost from 23,331.29 to 
23,331.29 (0.00%) and fill from 45.2% to 45.2% (0.00 percentage points). The parser receives the same 
repair. Valid historical stockouts remain demand-visibility evidence; the deliberately naive stockout-hold 
rule is reported only as a targeted mechanism ablation.
The expected managerial outcome is a graded approach rather than universal automation or universal 
manual approval. Straightforward, verified orders may be executed within spending caps. Orders based 
on materially uncertain demand or incomplete constraints may require approval. Orders based on 
contradictory, untraceable state should remain on hold. The relative economic value of those thresholds 
must be learned from controlled comparisons, not defended solely through intuition.
A concrete simulator case shows both the value and the limit of this design. On decision day 92, the 
damaged derived inventory for FRN_0422@S0173 was 0, while fresh source and movement balance 
both showed 444. The model selected the permitted reconciliation tool. Independent checks restored 444 
scaled model units, changed 27 permitted quantities and removed the integrity hard failure. The resulting 
order was still held: proposed spending of 1,657.60 exceeded the 1,500 autonomous cap. Correct 
exception handling can repair evidence without making the operating policy usable.
6.5.1 Exploratory transfer of the spending threshold
The original gate did not transfer successfully. Its inherited autonomous spending cap was 1,500 cost-
index points, while a clean proposed FreshRetailNet order could require about 1,656 points. In the 
primary normal parser condition, 14 of 14 decision days were held. This failure is reported before any 
repair: an architecture can be computationally feasible and still be commercially inactive if its threshold 
is carried into a new quantity scale without checking.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 57 of 115
The failure led to a separately registered follow-up. Its hypothesis was chosen after the primary study had 
started; the official holdout had already been used. The study therefore labels all subsequent transfer 
results exploratory. The original fixed-gate outputs are unchanged and remain in the report and archive.
Cap calibration uses seven earlier historical dates, training a separate GRU through day 75 and 
simulating June 12–18 (indices 76–82). The rule was fixed before those proposals were generated: 
min(0.8 × budget, ceil(1.10 × the seven-proposal 95th percentile / 50) × 50). The historical 95th 
percentile was 1,659.635; the selected cap was 1,850, below the 2,400 maximum. The independent two-
person threshold remains 2,500. All seven proposals were included, including 2 days held by the 
unchanged extra-spend risk rule. Proposal values, dates, model identity and selection timestamps are 
saved.
The transfer experiment contains 480 runs and 3,360 decision days: four configurations, four scenarios 
and 30 seeds. It uses the primary saved GRU tensors and the same simulator, supplier sources, LLM, 
prompts, constraints and checking tools. Only the spending cap and its version change semantically; 
output locations, cache and spend ledger are separately named for delivery and audit.
Cost and fill were identical in 240/240 parser–LLM pairs. Under the inventory-field fault, verified repair 
changed mean LLM cost by -11.71% and fill by +12.25 percentage points. These results distinguish 
fixing an unusable operating threshold from the value of the language model. They are not an untouched 
confirmation, and any shared repair benefit remains attributable to the architecture.
For a business, this is an implementation lesson as much as a modeling result. A limit calibrated for unit 
sales in one retailer can produce systematic holds after quantity normalization changes. Conservative 
caps remain valuable, but the business must verify that legitimate orders can pass them. That review 
should use historical proposals and explicit risk budgets, rather than repeatedly adjusting limits until a 
favourable holdout result appears.
The paired seed results show the benefit and its limits. Under the inventory-field fault, indexed cost falls 
in 26/30 seeds and rises in 4; fill improves in 30/30. Verified repair restores the normal-case economic 
and service results for every seed. The stale-feed condition is unchanged because fresh source evidence is 
unavailable. These are conditional simulator effects; the same recovery benefit occurs with the capable 
parser.
Calibration restores useful execution, but the remaining gate still carries an opportunity cost. Over the 
same 30 seeds, normal-operation fill is 79.19% for the calibrated controller and 85.03% for conventional 
B3, a -5.83-point change. Mean indexed cost is 18,100.60 against 18,794.03 (-3.69%), with 57 held days 
against 0. Both use the same saved forecaster, simulator and numerical tools and both have zero actual 
constraint violations. Lower indexed spending accompanies lower service; these values do not establish 
overall LLM superiority. The parser gives the same calibrated result, and this comparison remains 
exploratory.
Reference-only deviations are retained separately from actual active-rule violations in this follow-up as 
well. The legacy harmful_execution composite includes either endpoint. Its label alone cannot identify 
realized injury, waste or economic harm; outcomes and the underlying reason for each flag must be 
inspected.
The independent follow-up audit verifies 480 runs and 3,360 physical decision records. It captures 204 
fresh attempts and 308,841 tokens, with 0 client/schema errors. There are 0 actual committed requested-


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 58 of 115
plan violations. Selector compliance remains a separate table entry, so a blocked semantic error is not 
counted as a successful choice.
The bounded numerical head returns 38/38 exact submitted terms in 24 fresh extraction responses. 
Separately, 90/180 fresh recovery selections follow the instruction. The 90 stale-feed mis-selections are 
refused by independent checks. A zero client/schema-error count therefore coexists with substantive 
reasoning errors; safe final execution depends on the wider control process.
Grounding was attempted on 2,820 of 3,360 follow-up decision days; 2,820 of those attempted source 
sets were exact. Each available set has 163 clauses, yielding 459,660 exact active-rule records. The other 
540 days were state-gated before grounding and remain in the denominator of all decision days. These 
records combine a bounded model extraction head with deterministic parsing and verification; full-set 
agreement is not the model’s accuracy on every clause.
On the original matched seeds 13 and 29 in normal operation, cap transfer changed mean LLM cost from 
23,331.29 to 18,454.95 (-20.90%) and fill from 45.2% to 80.2% (+35.05 points). Held decision days 
changed from 14 to 3. These paired values isolate the cap change more clearly than comparing the 
primary two-seed mean with all 30 follow-up seeds, but the question remains exploratory.
Exploratory transfer means; primary results remain separate
Arm
Scenario
Runs
Cost index
Fill
Held days
Violations
LLM
Capacity cut
30
16,942.51
75.9%
15
0
LLM
Inventory-field 
fault
30
20,500.69
66.9%
105
0
LLM
Stale feed
30
20,500.69
66.9%
105
0
LLM
Normal
30
18,100.60
79.2%
57
0
LLM + repair
Capacity cut
30
16,942.51
75.9%
15
0
LLM + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
30
18,100.60
79.2%
57
0
LLM + repair
Stale feed
30
20,500.69
66.9%
105
0
LLM + repair
Normal
30
18,100.60
79.2%
57
0
Parser
Capacity cut
30
16,942.51
75.9%
15
0
Parser
Inventory-field 
fault
30
20,500.69
66.9%
105
0
Parser
Stale feed
30
20,500.69
66.9%
105
0
Parser
Normal
30
18,100.60
79.2%
57
0
Parser + repair
Capacity cut
30
16,942.51
75.9%
15
0
Parser + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
30
18,100.60
79.2%
57
0
Parser + repair
Stale feed
30
20,500.69
66.9%
105
0
Parser + repair
Normal
30
18,100.60
79.2%
57
0
Training-only proposed spending; all seven days retained
Historical decision
Spending index
76
1,658.700
77
1,657.600
78
1,659.800
79
1,657.050
80
1,649.900
81
1,506.350
82
1,659.250


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 59 of 115
Remaining clean-operation gate trade-off; 30 paired seeds, exploratory
Controller
Runs
Cost index
Fill
Held days
True violations
Conventional B3 
MILP
30
18,794.03
85.03%
0
0
Calibrated LLM 
with the shared 
gate
30
18,100.60
79.19%
57
0
Exploratory actual violations versus clean-reference distance
Arm
True rule checks 
violated
Reference-only 
flagged days
Nonzero action days
Held days
LLM
0
265
558
282
LLM + repair
0
311
606
234
Parser
0
265
558
282
Parser + repair
0
311
606
234
Independent audit of the exploratory transfer
Measure
Recorded count
Completed runs
480
Decision days
3360
Fresh model attempts
204
Recorded model tokens
308841
Client or schema errors
0
Violated active-rule checks in requested plans
0
Held decision days
1032
Instruction-compliant recovery selections
90
Incorrect recovery selections
90
Matched parser–LLM pairs
240
Pairs with identical primary outcomes
240
Pairs with identical daily actions
240
Verified physical stock balances
3360
Forbidden model-context findings
0
Exploratory source grounding; conditional coverage is explicit
Configuration
Grounding 
attempted
Exact full source 
sets
State-gated days
False clauses
Omitted clauses
Parser
660
660
180
0
0
Parser + repair
750
750
90
0
0
LLM
660
660
180
0
0
LLM + repair
750
750
90
0
0
Gate transfer on the same two original seeds; exploratory holdout reuse
Arm
Scenario
Cost change
Fill change (pp)
Held days before/after
LLM
Capacity cut
-21.24%
+18.64
4/1
LLM
Inventory-field fault
-14.97%
+23.62
14/7
LLM
Stale feed
-14.97%
+23.62
14/7
LLM
Normal
-20.90%
+35.05
14/3
LLM + repair
Capacity cut
-21.24%
+18.64
4/1
LLM + repair
Inventory-field fault
-20.90%
+35.05
14/3
LLM + repair
Stale feed
-14.97%
+23.62
14/7
LLM + repair
Normal
-20.90%
+35.05
14/3
Parser
Capacity cut
-21.24%
+18.64
4/1
Parser
Inventory-field fault
-14.97%
+23.62
14/7
Parser
Stale feed
-14.97%
+23.62
14/7
Parser
Normal
-20.90%
+35.05
14/3


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 60 of 115
Arm
Scenario
Cost change
Fill change (pp)
Held days before/after
Parser + repair
Capacity cut
-21.24%
+18.64
4/1
Parser + repair
Inventory-field fault
-20.90%
+35.05
14/3
Parser + repair
Stale feed
-14.97%
+23.62
14/7
Parser + repair
Normal
-20.90%
+35.05
14/3
Figure 6.12. A spending threshold needs calibration to its new scale. The right panel compares the same 
original seeds, 13 and 29, with 14 normal parser decision days under each cap. Full 30-seed means 
appear in the following figure. The fixed-gate failure motivated this exploratory follow-up after primary 
evaluation began. Seven historical calibration proposals use training-only dates and a separately fitted 
model. The cap formula was registered before calibration. Reusing the official evaluation window means 
the follow-up is not confirmatory.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 61 of 115
Figure 6.13. Exploratory calibrated transfer: useful execution and fair attribution. 30 paired simulator 
seeds per configuration and scenario, all 30 series and seven days. The original saved forecast, prompts, 
model and numerical tools are retained. Only the spending threshold and its version change semantically. 
This follow-up was chosen after inspecting primary portability and reuses the holdout.
Figure 6.14. Record-repair benefit should survive individual paired seeds. Each point is a matched 
simulator seed in the exploratory follow-up, with a short line for its mean. Seeds vary a shared assumed 
environment, not independent retailers or historical forecast origins. The graph makes adverse and null 
effects visible without a confirmatory population claim.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 62 of 115
6.6 Reliability and the limits of multi-agent attribution
The system has typed responsibilities and independent verification, but this study does not isolate the 
number  of  agents  or  execute  every  single-agent  and  free-form-chat  comparison  proposed  earlier. 
Measured  reliability  comes  from  source  grounding,  completed  traces,  model  calls  and  committed 
outcomes. Cache imports are not new trials. Conclusions concern the verified workflow rather than an 
untested benefit of additional agents.
In the primary live study, 24 physical extraction calls returned 38 exact numerical terms out of 38. That 
is the bounded numerical head, not the whole supplier corpus. Twelve fresh recovery selections were 
instruction-compliant in six cases; six wrong selections were refused by independent checks. Across 224 
agent decisions, 188 attempted source grounding and all 188 source sets were exact. Each set has 163 
clauses, yielding 30,644 checked active clauses; 36 state-gated decisions did not attempt grounding. 
Exact conditional source coverage must not be relabelled unconditional model accuracy.
The primary agent configurations made 40 nonzero action-days and held 184 decision-days in total. The 
nonzero actions occur under capacity cuts, whose smaller orders can pass the inherited spending cap. 
Normal, field-fault and stale-feed scenarios are fully held. These successful bounded actions demonstrate 
feasibility in a narrow condition, while the normal-operation failure motivates the explicitly separate 
transfer follow-up.
All 40 primary nonzero agent action-days carry a reference-distance flag, with zero actual constraint 
violations. The legacy composite therefore labels them harmful_execution even though the flag arises 
from plan distance alone. The report retains those counts and makes no claim of zero modeled risk or 
zero disagreement with the reference. Feasibility, clean-reference agreement and achieved service are 
distinct endpoints.
Results table. Primary registered study audit: distinct operational counts
Measure
Recorded count
Completed runs
392
Decision days
2744
Conventional core runs
360
Matched controller runs
32
Fresh model attempts
36
Fresh model responses
36
Recorded model tokens
37506
Client or schema errors
0
Fresh numerical-extraction responses
24
Fresh recovery selections
12
Violated active-rule checks in requested plans
1269
Held decision days
814
Instruction-compliant recovery selections
6
Incorrect recovery selections
6
Matched parser–LLM pairs
16
Pairs with identical primary outcomes
16
Pairs with identical daily actions
16
Verified physical stock balances
2744
Forbidden model-context findings
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 63 of 115
Results table. Source grounding coverage; full columns in the audit CSV
Configuration
Grounding 
attempted
Exact full source 
sets
State-gated days
False clauses
Omitted clauses
numerical
2340
2340
180
0
0
Parser
44
44
12
0
0
Parser + repair
50
50
6
0
0
LLM
44
44
12
0
0
LLM + repair
50
50
6
0
0
6.7 Decision traces and human review: evidence and future validation
A good explanation should help a person challenge a recommendation rather than simply make it sound 
persuasive. On M5, the crucial information may be the inventory snapshot, supplier rule, or held-order 
rationale. On FreshRetailNet, it may be the number of stockout hours, the difference between raw and 
recovered demand, and how much the proposed order changes under plausible recovery alternatives. A 
trace that labels observed, inferred, and simulated fields may allow a reviewer to identify questionable 
assumptions more quickly than a fluent paragraph without evidence.
No formal human study was conducted. Structured traces make decisions reviewable and their references 
auditable. They do not by themselves prove faster review, lower staff effort or better calibrated trust. 
Those remain participant-study outcomes for later validation.
6.8 Cross-Dataset Synthesis and Practical Adoption
The two datasets support a useful but bounded synthesis. Verified record repair can restore continuity 
under a known fault; the LLM does not add measured cost or fill value over the capable parser on the 
tested grammar. FreshRetailNet contributes observed stockout timing, artificial-mask tests and perishable 
trade-offs. These are information and architecture findings, rather than proof that the language model 
forecasts better. Cross-dataset contrasts remain descriptive because horizons and economics differ.
For an organisation considering investment, a sensible staged path is to establish data lineage and basic 
inventory checks, make the distinction between observed sales and censored demand where needed, 
document supplier and assortment constraints, benchmark against a capable deterministic controller, and 
only then add LLM assistance for exceptions where its net value is demonstrated. Autonomy should 
expand through audited thresholds, not simply because the technology makes automated execution 
possible. Chapter 8 returns to this adoption principle as the central business contribution of the study.
Results table. Within-dataset inventory-repair contrasts
Dataset
Scenario
Days
Cost change
Fill change(pp)
Identical 
parser/LLM pairs
M5
Normal
14
0.00%
0.00
4/4
M5
Inventory-field 
fault
14
-10.93%
7.00
4/4
M5
Stale feed
14
0.00%
0.00
4/4
M5
Capacity cut
14
0.00%
0.00
4/4
FreshRetailNet 
(fixed gate)
Normal
7
0.00%
0.00
4/4
FreshRetailNet 
(fixed gate)
Inventory-field 
fault
7
0.00%
0.00
4/4
FreshRetailNet 
(fixed gate)
Stale feed
7
0.00%
0.00
4/4


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 64 of 115
Dataset
Scenario
Days
Cost change
Fill change(pp)
Identical 
parser/LLM pairs
FreshRetailNet 
(fixed gate)
Capacity cut
7
0.00%
0.00
4/4
FreshRetailNet 
(calibrated gate)
Normal
7
0.00%
0.00
60/60
FreshRetailNet 
(calibrated gate)
Inventory-field 
fault
7
-11.71%
12.25
60/60
FreshRetailNet 
(calibrated gate)
Stale feed
7
0.00%
0.00
60/60
FreshRetailNet 
(calibrated gate)
Capacity cut
7
0.00%
0.00
60/60
Figure 6.15. Two information environments; two separately estimated effects. Separate within-dataset 
repair effects under an inventory-field fault. M5 uses 14 days and FreshRetailNet seven; their quantity 
units, expiry assumptions and economics differ. The calibrated result is an exploratory reused-holdout 
follow-up with 30 simulator seeds; the other bars have two. These bars do not estimate a commercial 
return or the causal effect of changing datasets.
The business case supported by this evidence is for a controlled replenishment process. A retailer needs 
dependable stock evidence, a clearly labelled estimate when availability hides demand, typed supplier 
rules and checks before spending. An LLM can participate inside that process. The experiments have not 
established that it should replace the conventional numerical tools or a capable rules engine.
Useful language tasks remain plausible: translating supplier clauses into checkable fields, requesting a 
permitted exception tool, and producing a decision packet connected to its sources. The study 
demonstrates bounded feasibility for a controlled synthetic grammar. It does not measure planner time 
savings, human trust, unfamiliar natural-contract performance or production ROI. Those are distinct 
investment tests.
A sensible deployment starts in shadow mode with actual inventories and supplier documents, then 
moves to reviewed orders and spending caps. Compare exception-resolution quality and delay against the 
existing system. Expand autonomy only where the measured additional benefit covers error, oversight, 
hosting and integration costs. Where a capable parser gives the same business outcome more cheaply, it 
remains a reasonable default.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 65 of 115
Results table. Answers to the retained research questions
Question
Completed answer
Scope limit
RQ1: performance
Conventional policies and matched 
parser/LLM outcomes are reported for 
each core scenario.
All single-agent and free-form 
architectures remain unexecuted.
RQ2: evidence gate
M5 detects known faults; FreshRetailNet 
exposes spending-cap portability and 
delay costs.
Effects depend on thresholds and 
simulator assumptions.
RQ3: censored demand
Recovery is measurable on masking; final 
forecast benefit is mixed; default 
service/expiry trade-off is small.
Natural unserved demand has no 
identified target.
RQ4: availability vs error
The explicit stockout-gate ablation shows 
a valid observation need not justify an 
integrity hold.
The naive comparator is a mechanism 
test, not a capable production parser.
RQ5: semantic value
Cost and fill match the capable parser on 
the disclosed synthetic grammar.
Unfamiliar, conflicting natural documents 
are not tested.
RQ6: agent organization
Typed outputs and independent checks 
are operationally audited.
No head-to-head test isolates additional 
agent roles.
RQ7: trace quality
Source-linked records, physical balances 
and attempts are machine-audited.
Human diagnosis and trust were not 
measured.
RQ8: generalizability
Within-dataset effects and scale-transfer 
failure are compared descriptively.
One small panel and origin cannot 
establish retailer-wide external validity.
Results table. Hypotheses: descriptive evidence status, without confirmatory tests
Hypothesis
Status
Reason
H1
Descriptively consistent
Matched grammar outcomes show no 
additional LLM cost/fill advantage; this is 
not a noninferiority test.
H2
Mechanism verified; incremental benefit 
bounded
Detected evidence faults trigger holds or 
verified repair. Conventional MILP 
already has zero actual rule violations; 
cap portability restricts useful execution.
H3
Mixed and conditional
Recovery selection, forecast accuracy and 
service–expiry trade-offs differ; natural 
demand recovery is not proved.
H4
Supported within the targeted ablation
Holding on valid stockout observations 
worsens simulated service against the 
censoring-aware rule.
H5
Supported on templates; remaining clause 
untested
The capable parser matches the LLM. 
Gains on unfamiliar documents were not 
evaluated.
H6
Untested as a comparative hypothesis
No free-form multi-agent baseline isolates 
typed-state or specialization effects.
H7
Untested
No participant study measures fault 
diagnosis, acceptance or trust.
H8
Conditional engineering evidence
Known-fault controls are useful, but the 
transferred cap fails until a separately 
calibrated exploratory follow-up.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 66 of 115
CHAPTER 7  Ethical, Safety, and Governance Considerations
7.1 Automation Bias and Accountability
FreshRetailNet adds a particular source of automation bias: a planner may interpret a recovered-demand 
number as though it had been observed in transactions. The proposed interface must label every recovery 
estimate as an inference with uncertainty and show the original stockout evidence that motivated it. A 
model that reports “120 lost units” without uncertainty or a public ground-truth basis can create stronger, 
but unjustified, confidence in a purchase recommendation. The manager remains accountable for risk 
limits and approval policy even when the calculation is automated.
A polished AI recommendation can appear more authoritative than it deserves. Human-factors research 
shows that users may over-rely on automated outputs, especially when the system presents itself with 
confidence (Parasuraman & Riley, 1997). The design therefore treats explanation as evidence for review 
rather than as a tool for persuasion. Failed checks, uncertainty, alternatives, and escalation reasons 
should be shown alongside the recommended action.
Accountability  also  requires  a  clear  record  of  who  or  what  made  the  final  decision.  The  trace 
distinguishes between a system-generated proposal, a human-approved order, a human-modified order, a 
held decision, and a bounded-autonomous execution. Procurement policy remains an organizational 
responsibility even when the computational steps are automated.
7.2 Data Quality as a Safety Property
The added benchmark makes clear that data quality and demand visibility are not the same property. A 
correct stockout indicator is useful evidence, although it reveals that the recorded sales value is only a 
lower bound on demand. The quality gate should therefore distinguish corrupt or missing availability 
data from genuine inventory unavailability. Over-aggressive holds during real stockouts can themselves 
worsen stockout persistence, while unwarranted demand imputation may increase spoilage. Both trade-
offs are explicit in the evaluation.
Evidence gating shifts some risk from acting on bad information to delaying an action. The primary cap-
transfer failure makes that trade-off visible: a controller can satisfy its checks while systematically 
withholding otherwise feasible orders. Holds should therefore be reported beside service, cost and the 
time needed to resolve an exception. A held decision means the permitted action lacks sufficient support 
under the current policy; it does not establish that ordering nothing is the best business decision.
The dissertation uses only public benchmark data and synthetic operational layers. No confidential 
retailer sales, supplier terms, or production telemetry are required for the reported experiment. This 
improves reproducibility and reduces privacy and commercial-confidentiality concerns.
7.3 Security and Prompt Injection
Dataset governance matters as well. FreshRetailNet uses pseudonymized identifiers and a public CC BY 
4.0 release. The dissertation cites the publisher, records the dataset and code versions, and does not 
attempt to identify stores, individuals, or unreleased commercial information. Public supplier-text stress 
tests are synthetic and must be separated from any actual business documents. A future deployment 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 67 of 115
would also require controls over contracts, inventory records, model providers, and purchase-order 
permissions that cannot be evaluated from these public files alone.
Supplier documents, spreadsheets, and operational notes are untrusted inputs. Research on indirect 
prompt injection shows that content retrieved by an LLM-enabled application can contain instructions 
designed to influence the model's behavior (Greshake et al., 2023). The architecture therefore separates 
data  from  system  instructions,  restricts  tools  by  role,  validates  structured  outputs,  and  requires 
authenticated sources before a document can change an executable constraint.
Execution endpoints use least privilege and idempotency keys. A language model that interprets a 
contract does not automatically receive permission to submit a purchase order. This separation of 
interpretation from execution is as important as the prompt-level defenses.
7.4 Supplier Concentration
Optimization can unintentionally reinforce supplier concentration when one supplier appears consistently 
cheaper or more reliable. The issue is secondary in a replenishment study where many products may be 
effectively  single-sourced,  but  it  remains  a  governance  concern.  Where  supplier  choice  exists, 
concentration should be measured and, if diversification is a policy objective, represented explicitly as a 
constraint rather than expected to emerge from the cost function.
7.5 Environmental and Economic Externalities
Fresh-retail waste is a central business and sustainability dimension. Since the released dataset does not 
provide measured product expiry or disposed quantities, waste is evaluated through simulated shelf lives 
and explicitly stated disposal penalties. Those scenario results may show how governance and demand 
recovery shift the service–waste trade-off, but they cannot be claimed as measured reductions in food 
waste at Dingdong. Any claim about the sustainability benefit of an LLM should also account for its 
computational cost and whether a deterministic alternative provides comparable outcomes.
Higher service levels can require more stock, storage, transport, and expedited shipments. Conversely, 
poor replenishment can create waste through obsolescence or markdowns. Where data are available, 
environmental costs can be added to the objective or reported separately. The computational cost of 
agentic AI is also recorded through model calls, token usage, and latency so that the system can be 
compared with simpler alternatives.
7.6 Limitations
The  design  has  five  main  limitations.  First,  neither  benchmark  supplies  the  full  inventory-and-
procurement state required to observe real autonomous purchasing: stock balances, suppliers, lead times, 
purchase orders and procurement costs are simulated. Second, even FreshRetailNet's genuine stockout 
flags do not reveal the quantity of latent customer demand during unavailable hours; recovery can be 
assessed directly only on artificially hidden observations and indirectly through held-out forecasting. 
Third, FreshRetailNet's global sales normalization prevents a straightforward interpretation of its values 
as physical unit counts, and its seven-day held-out period limits longer-run causal claims. Its brief history 
also restricts seasonal extrapolation.
Fourth, outcomes from simulated alternative replenishment policies are conditional on assumptions about 
demand, delivery, prices, shelf lives and objectives. The independent calculator sensitivity does not share 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 68 of 115
the core MILP’s economic scale or target timing. Fifth, supplier documents use a controlled synthetic 
grammar and a single small local LLM. No human study was conducted. The primary agent experiment 
has two seeds; the calibrated follow-up has 30 but reuses the holdout after the portability failure was 
observed. These studies do not establish population significance or production returns.
The valid claims concern disclosed engineering comparisons: recovery and forecasting on observable 
targets, conditional policy outcomes in simulation, and the behaviour of structured checks under known 
test faults. The negative findings also matter. A conventional constrained optimizer already avoided the 
tested hard-rule violations, and the capable parser matched the LLM’s cost and fill. External business 
impact requires independent inventory, procurement and outcome data from a partner retailer.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 69 of 115
CHAPTER 8  Conclusion
8.1 Contribution and Answer to the Management Question
This dissertation asks when an organisation should allow an AI system to turn a stock recommendation 
into a purchase. The proposed answer is deliberately conditional. Autonomy should be supported by 
evidence about the underlying state, the uncertainty of demand, the validity of business constraints, and 
the consequences of being wrong. Forecasting and optimization already provide much of the numerical 
decision-making;  LLMs  may  add  value  in  interpreting  ambiguous  information  and  coordinating 
exceptions, but their additional benefit must be measured against an equally well-equipped deterministic 
alternative.
The redesigned study uses two public benchmarks to examine this proposition under distinct conditions. 
M5 supplies the longer, hierarchical sales environment in which inventory policies, supplier constraints, 
and  operational  failures  can  be  simulated  and  compared.  FreshRetailNet-50K  adds  a  realistic 
measurement complication: the public data contain hourly records of genuine stockouts that can suppress 
observed sales. This makes it possible to evaluate when a demand-recovery step changes forecasts and 
simulated ordering decisions. The study treats the datasets as complementary rather than interchangeable 
and keeps observed, inferred and simulated information separate.
The research contribution is both technical and managerial: a common, auditable decision architecture; a 
way to distinguish bad data from censored-but-valid observations; a test design that attributes benefits to 
forecasting, recovery, validation, or language-based coordination rather than conflating them; and a 
staged governance framework for adopting autonomous replenishment. The completed M5 pilot already 
demonstrates  why  attribution  is  necessary:  its  beneficial  state  recovery  was  also  achieved  by  a 
deterministic parser, and its LLM made incorrect recovery-tool selections that independent checks 
prevented from becoming unsafe executions.
The primary transfer result also changes the managerial answer. The inherited 1,500-point autonomous 
spending cap held every normal-operation decision, even when source evidence was clean. On the same 
original seeds, historical calibration to 1,850 points changed mean fill from 45.2% to 80.2% and held 
days from 14 to 3. The exploratory follow-up found identical cost and fill in 240/240 parser–LLM pairs. 
Useful autonomy therefore requires operating limits that fit the business scale, as well as trustworthy 
evidence. The gain is shared by the verified architecture; it is not an isolated language-model return. The 
calibrated controller’s full 30-seed normal fill was 79.2%, below the conventional constrained B3 
baseline’s 85.0%. Its lower indexed cost accompanies lower service, so calibration does not remove the 
remaining opportunity cost of the gate.
8.2 Completed evidence and its limits
Both benchmarks now contribute completed engineering evidence. The M5 archive retains the original 
numerical and feasibility study and the 32-run V2 pilot. FreshRetailNet adds 360 numerical runs, 32 
matched live runs, 1,080 independent calculator sensitivity runs, 60 gate ablations, and protected forecast 
and recovery tests on 30 series. The evidence is conditional on the disclosed panel and assumptions. It 
does not validate all 50,000 series, natural lost demand, commercial waste savings or human trust. 
Incremental language-model superiority over a capable parser was not demonstrated by matched cost and 
fill. A separate 480-run follow-up was motivated by the inherited spending cap's failure to pass clean 


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 70 of 115
orders. A registered training-only calibration selected a cap of 1,850; the evaluation reuses the holdout 
and is explicitly exploratory. Its 30 simulation seeds per cell do not turn that post-primary question into 
an untouched confirmation.
Neither public benchmark reveals every business quantity needed to evaluate actual purchase orders. 
True lost demand is unobserved during natural stockouts, and the cost of an alternative inventory policy 
can only be evaluated inside an assumed counterfactual world. The completed checks support the 
implemented feature and evidence boundaries. They do not remove the need to test those assumptions 
against independent operational outcomes.
8.3 Future Research and Managerial Implementation
The next priority is broader independent product, store and time panels, real inventory and procurement 
ground truth, and difficult natural supplier documents with fair parser coverage. Recovery needs external 
checks where demand was not observed. Human review and partner shadow-mode studies could measure 
whether checked language assistance improves exception resolution enough to justify its operating 
burden.
For  organisations,  the  practical  adoption  sequence  should  be  staged.  Start  with  inventory  data 
reconciliation, timestamp  and  unit  checks, and complete  decision  lineage.  Where  stockouts  cause 
demand censoring, add a properly calibrated recovery model and show its uncertainty rather than silently 
replacing observed sales. Represent supplier and assortment rules as typed constraints. Test an LLM on 
the exceptions conventional software cannot reliably parse, retaining independent verification and clearly 
defined  approval  rights.  Only  then  should  the  system  progress  to  bounded  autonomous  purchase 
execution, and only after empirical evidence shows that its benefits exceed its error, oversight and 
operating costs.
The longer-term contribution would be validation with genuine retailer procurement and inventory 
outcomes, including measured spoilage, realized supplier lead times, purchase-order modifications, and 
staff adoption. Such validation could turn this careful simulation and benchmark research into an 
evidence-based guide for deploying trustworthy autonomous operational systems.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 71 of 115
References
Ansari, A. F., Stella, L., Turkmen, C., Zhang, X., Mercado, P., Shen, H., Shchur, O., Rangapuram, S. S., Arango, S. P., 
Kapoor, S., Zschiegner, J., Maddix, D. C., Wang, H., Mahoney, M. W., Torkkola, K., Wilson, A. G., Bohlke-
Schneider, M., & Wang, Y. (2024). Chronos: Learning the language of time series. Transactions on Machine 
Learning Research. https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07815
Ao, R., Simchi-Levi, D., & Wang, X. (2026). OptiRepair: Closed-loop diagnosis and repair of supply chain optimization 
models with LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19439. https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.19439
Arcuschin, I., Janiak, J., Krzyzanowski, R., Rajamanoharan, S., Nanda, N., & Conmy, A. (2025). Chain-of-thought 
reasoning in the wild is not always faithful. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08679. https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08679
Azar, J. (2026). A reproducible, leakage-free pipeline for censored demand forecasting and inventory optimization on 
FreshRetailNet-50K. Inventions, 11(5), Article 89. https://doi.org/10.3390/inventions11050089
Chen, F., Drezner, Z., Ryan, J. K., & Simchi-Levi, D. (2000). Quantifying the bullwhip effect in a simple supply chain: 
The impact of forecasting, lead times, and information. Management Science, 46(3), 436–443. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.46.3.436.12069
Clark, A. J., & Scarf, H. (1960). Optimal policies for a multi-echelon inventory problem. Management Science, 6(4), 475
–490. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.6.4.475
Croston, J. D. (1972). Forecasting and stock control for intermittent demands. Operational Research Quarterly, 23(3), 
289–303. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.1972.50
Das, L., Carrel, A. L., & Caplice, C. (2021). Pack size effects on retail store inventory and storage space needs. INFOR: 
Information Systems and Operational Research, 59(3), 465–494. https://doi.org/10.1080/03155986.2021.1918487
DeHoratius, N., & Raman, A. (2008). Inventory record inaccuracy: An empirical analysis. Management Science, 54(4), 
627–641. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1070.0789
DeHoratius, N., Mersereau, A. J., & Schrage, L. (2008). Retail inventory management when records are inaccurate. 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 10(2), 257–277. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1070.0203
Dingdong-Inc. (2025). FreshRetailNet-50K (Version 1.0): Dataset card and data dictionary [Data set]. Hugging Face. 
https://huggingface.co/datasets/Dingdong-Inc/FreshRetailNet-50K
Gneiting, T., & Raftery, A. E. (2007). Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation. Journal of the American 
Statistical Association, 102(477), 359–378. https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437
Greshake, K., Abdelnabi, S., Mishra, S., Endres, C., Holz, T., & Fritz, M. (2023). Not what you've signed up for: 
Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection. Proceedings of the 16th ACM 
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec '23), 79–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/3605764.3623985
GS1. (2022). EPCIS and Core Business Vocabulary (CBV), version 2.0. https://ref.gs1.org/standards/epcis/2.0.0/
GS1. (2026). Global Data Model standard, version 2.18.0. https://ref.gs1.org/standards/gdm/
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design science in information systems research. MIS Quarterly, 
28(1), 75–105. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148625
Jannelli, V., Schoepf, S., Bickel, M., Netland, T., & Brintrup, A. (2024). Agentic LLMs in the supply chain: Towards 
autonomous multi-agent consensus-seeking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10184. https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10184
Kang, Y., & Gershwin, S. B. (2005). Information inaccuracy in inventory systems: Stock loss and stockout. IIE 
Transactions, 37(9), 843–859. https://doi.org/10.1080/07408170590969861
Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V., & Whang, S. (1997). Information distortion in a supply chain: The bullwhip effect. 
Management Science, 43(4), 546–558. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.43.4.546
Li, B., Mellou, K., Zhang, B., Pathuri, J., & Menache, I. (2023). Large language models for supply chain optimization. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03875. https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03875


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 72 of 115
Lim, B., Arik, S. O., Loeff, N., & Pfister, T. (2021). Temporal Fusion Transformers for interpretable multi-horizon time 
series forecasting. International Journal of Forecasting, 37(4), 1748–1764. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2021.03.012
Little, R. J. A., & Rubin, D. B. (2019). Statistical analysis with missing data (3rd ed.). Wiley. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119482260
Liu, B., Jiang, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, Q., Zhang, S., Biswas, J., & Stone, P. (2023). LLM+P: Empowering large language 
models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11477. https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11477
Liu, X., Yu, H., Zhang, H., Xu, Y., Lei, X., Lai, H., Gu, Y., Ding, H., Men, K., Yang, K., Zhang, S., Deng, X., Zeng, A., 
Du, Z., Zhang, C., Shen, S., Zhang, T., Su, Y., Sun, H., Huang, M., Dong, Y., & Tang, J. (2024). AgentBench: 
Evaluating LLMs as agents. International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=zAdUB0aCTQ
Long, C. X., Simchi-Levi, D., Zhu, F., Su, H., Calmon, A. P., & Calmon, F. P. (2026). Reliability and effectiveness of 
autonomous AI agents in supply chain management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17036. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.17036
M5 v2 Pilot Report. (2026, October 8). M5 replenishment agent version-2 pilot: Measured simulator outputs and 
captured requests [Unpublished internal simulation report supplied with this dissertation].
Ma, C., Zhang, J., Zhu, Z., Yang, C., Yang, Y., Jin, Y., Lan, Z., Kong, L., & He, J. (2024). AgentBoard: An analytical 
evaluation board of multi-turn LLM agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13178
Makridakis, S., Spiliotis, E., & Assimakopoulos, V. (2022a). M5 accuracy competition: Results, findings, and 
conclusions. International Journal of Forecasting, 38(4), 1346–1364. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2021.11.013
Makridakis, S., Spiliotis, E., Assimakopoulos, V., Chen, Z., Gaba, A., Tsetlin, I., & Winkler, R. L. (2022b). The M5 
uncertainty competition: Results, findings and conclusions. International Journal of Forecasting, 38(4), 1365–1385. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2021.10.009
Mantrala, M. K., Levy, M., Kahn, B. E., Fox, E. J., Gaidarev, P., Dankworth, B., & Shah, D. (2009). Why is assortment 
planning so difficult for retailers? A framework and research agenda. Journal of Retailing, 85(1), 71–83. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2008.11.006
Nahmias, S. (1982). Perishable inventory theory: A review. Operations Research, 30(4), 680–708. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.30.4.680
Nahmias, S. (1994). Demand estimation in lost sales inventory systems. Naval Research Logistics, 41(6), 739–757. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1520-6750(199410)41:6<739::AID-NAV3220410605>3.0.CO;2-A
Object Management Group. (n.d.). ARTS Operational Data Model. Retail Domain Task Force. Accessed 7 October 2026. 
https://www.omg.org/retail/operational-data-model.htm
Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and automation: Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors, 39(2), 230–
253. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872097778543886
Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T. B., & Wickens, C. D. (2000). A model for types and levels of human interaction with 
automation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part A, 30(3), 286–297. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/3468.844354
Paterson, C., Kiesmüller, G., Teunter, R., & Glazebrook, K. (2011). Inventory models with lateral transshipments: A 
review. European Journal of Operational Research, 210(2), 125–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2010.05.048
Quan, Y., & Liu, Z. (2024). InvAgent: A large language model based multi-agent system for inventory management in 
supply chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11384. https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11384
Rahm, E., & Do, H. H. (2000). Data cleaning: Problems and current approaches. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 23(4), 
3–13.
Rajaram, K. (2001). Assortment planning in fashion retailing: Methodology, application and analysis. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 129(1), 186–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(99)00406-3


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 73 of 115
Rockafellar, R. T., & Uryasev, S. (2000). Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. Journal of Risk, 2(3), 21–41. 
https://doi.org/10.21314/JOR.2000.038
Salinas, D., Flunkert, V., Gasthaus, J., & Januschowski, T. (2020). DeepAR: Probabilistic forecasting with autoregressive 
recurrent networks. International Journal of Forecasting, 36(3), 1181–1191. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2019.07.001
Shen, X., Wang, S., Tan, Z., Yao, L., Zhao, X., Xu, K., Wang, X., & Chen, T. (2025). FaithCoT-Bench: Benchmarking 
instance-level faithfulness of chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04040. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04040
Simchi-Levi, D., Mellou, K., Menache, I., & Pathuri, J. (2025). Large language models for supply chain decisions. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2507.21502. https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.21502
Souibgui, M., Atigui, F., Zammali, S., Si-Said Cherfi, S., & Ben Yahia, S. (2019). Data quality in ETL process: A 
preliminary study. Procedia Computer Science, 159, 676–687. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.223
Sterman, J. D. (1989). Modeling managerial behavior: Misperceptions of feedback in a dynamic decision making 
experiment. Management Science, 35(3), 321–339. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.35.3.321
Syntetos, A. A., & Boylan, J. E. (2005). The accuracy of intermittent demand estimates. International Journal of 
Forecasting, 21(2), 303–314. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2004.10.001
Turpin, M., Michael, J., Perez, E., & Bowman, S. R. (2023). Language models don't always say what they think: 
Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36. 
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ed3fea9033a80fea1376299fa7863f4a-Abstract-
Conference.html
van Donselaar, K. H., Gaur, V., van Woensel, T., Broekmeulen, R. A. C. M., & Fransoo, J. C. (2010). Ordering behavior 
in retail stores and implications for automated replenishment. Management Science, 56(5), 766–784. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1090.1141
Wang, R. Y., & Strong, D. M. (1996). Beyond accuracy: What data quality means to data consumers. Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 12(4), 5–33. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.1996.11518099
Wang, Y., Gu, J., Long, L., Li, X., Shen, L., Fu, Z., Zhou, X., & Jiang, X. (2025). FreshRetailNet-50K: A stockout-
annotated censored demand dataset for latent demand recovery and forecasting in fresh retail (arXiv:2505.16319; 
updated 2026). arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.16319
Wickramasuriya, S. L., Athanasopoulos, G., & Hyndman, R. J. (2019). Optimal forecast reconciliation for hierarchical 
and grouped time series through trace minimization. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 114(526), 804–
819. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2018.1448825
Woo, G., Liu, C., Kumar, A., Xiong, C., Savarese, S., & Sahoo, D. (2024). Unified training of universal time series 
forecasting transformers. Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02592
Woodall, P., Borek, A., Oberhofer, M. A., & Gao, J. (2016). Data quality problems in ETL: The state of the practice in 
large organisations. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Information Quality (ICIQ 2016) (pp. 54
–64).
Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., Awadallah, A. H., White, 
R. W., Burger, D., & Wang, C. (2023). AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155. https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08155
Yang, Q., Ge, M., & Helfert, M. (2017). Guidelines of data quality issues for data integration in the context of the TPC-
DI benchmark. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS) (pp. 
135–144). https://doi.org/10.5220/0006334301350144
Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., & Cao, Y. (2023). ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and 
acting in language models. International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=WE_vluYUL-X
Yoshizato, K., Shimizu, K., Higa, R., & Otsuka, T. (2026). AI agent systems for supply chains: Structured decision 
prompts and memory retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05524. https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05524


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 74 of 115
Zhao, X., Xie, Y., Chen, C., & Sun, Y. (2025). AIM-Bench: Evaluating decision-making biases of agentic LLM as 
inventory manager. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.11416. https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.11416
Zipkin, P. H. (2000). Foundations of inventory management. McGraw-Hill.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 75 of 115
Appendix A Reproducible Implementation Plan
A.1 Implementation Phases and Acceptance Criteria
The implementation program below records what the bounded study completed and what remains outside 
its scope. Source validation, the 30-series adapters, point-recovery and forecast tests, physical expiry, 
controlled agent comparisons and descriptive reporting are complete. Full architecture ablations and 
human participants remain unevaluated.
Phase
Output
Acceptance gate
Reported status
1. Data 
acquisition
Pinned M5 and 
FreshRetailNet source 
manifests
Licenses, source hashes, schema 
checks, distinct series and date 
coverage reported
Complete source profiles and 
pinned hashes
2. Canonical 
adapters
Mapped daily sales, hourly 
availability and hierarchy 
tables
Keys, scale metadata, stockout 
polarity, child-array consistency 
verified
Complete; simulated fields 
explicitly labelled
3. Recovery 
models
Raw, exposure-based, 
regression and learned 
recovery artefacts
Artificial-mask targets identified 
without using future observations
Three point-estimate methods; 
natural truth unavailable
4. Forecasting
Train-only fitted 
transformations and seven-
day/28-day forecasts
Eval-target and eval-weather 
perturbation tests do not change 
prior predictions
Four forecasts on 30 series; no 
full probabilistic suite
5. Simulators
Age-aware Track F 
simulator and existing 
Track M simulator
Inventory balance, receipts, 
expiry, deterministic paired 
replay
FIFO and separate calculators; 
core MILP is age-unaware
6. Controls 
and agents
B1–B11 policy 
implementations
Matching tools and constraints; 
hold/approval/execution traces 
complete
B1/B2/B3/B4 and matched 
B10; other architecture 
families untested
7. Statistical 
report
Frozen contrasts, CIs, 
paired outcomes and 
exclusions
Independent seed count, unit of 
analysis and negative results 
disclosed
Descriptive paired effects; 
conditional seed variation
8. Human 
review
Counterbalanced audit 
packets and approval 
protocol
Ethical approval and recruitment 
before claiming participant 
results
Not conducted; no participant 
claim
Table A.1. Implementation and evidence gates for the expanded study.
A.2 Dataset Loader and Validation Pseudocode
# Pseudocode: exact package versions and hashes are pinned before execution
frn = load_dataset("Dingdong-Inc/FreshRetailNet-50K")
assert required_fields <= set(frn["train"].column_names)
assert len(frn["train"]) == 4_500_000          # verify against pinned release
assert len(frn["eval"]) == 350_000
assert no_overlapping_store_product_dates(frn["train"], frn["eval"])
assert daily_series_complete_or_flagged(frn)
assert check_hourly_sales_alignment(frn)
assert stockout_count_matches_hourly_mask(frn, hours=range(6, 22))


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 76 of 115
train, val_folds, test = make_temporal_split(frn, holdout="official_eval")
for fold in val_folds:
    rec = fit_recovery(fold.train_only)
    feat = fit_features(fold.train_only, rec)
    preds = predict_recursive_7d(feat, fold.future_exante_covariates)
    assert unaffected_by_scrambling_future_actuals(preds)
select_models_and_policies_using_validation_only()
run_final_test_once()
for dataset in ("M5", "FreshRetailNet-50K"):
    for origin, scenario, seed in preregistered_runs(dataset):
        shared_world = make_simulation_world(origin, scenario, seed)
        for policy in ("B4", "B10", "B11_if_fresh"):
            outcome = simulate(policy, shared_world.clone())
            validate_solver_certificates(outcome)
            write_immutable_trace(outcome)
This pseudocode explains the timing and validation rules; the executable scripts and saved manifests are 
the authoritative implementation. The downloaded release passed key, chronology, hourly sales and flag-
alignment checks. Discount values outside [0,1] were retained and reported, with discount excluded from 
forecasting features. Every exception and exclusion remains in the source-validation receipts.
A.3 Configuration Manifest
research_version: freshretailnet-bounded-v1
status: completed_bounded_panel
source_revision: 08c1fab7f9257bc73679d415d65d644165d351d4
source_license: CC-BY-4.0
source_validation: 4,850,000 daily rows / 50,000 series
modeling_panel: 30 training-selected series / 0.06% of release
final_horizon: 7 days after 90 training days
primary_numerical: 360 runs / 30 simulation seeds
primary_agent_factorial: 32 runs / 2 simulation seeds
independent_policy_sensitivity: 1,080 runs
stockout_gate_ablation: 60 runs
quantity_scale_core: 100 * globally_normalized_sales
economic_unit: simulated cost index
future_observed_features: prohibited
natural_lost_demand_ground_truth: unavailable
human_participants: not conducted
authoritative_manifest: results/freshretailnet/protocol.json
exploratory_gate_transfer: 480 runs / 30 seeds
transfer_status: post-primary hypothesis / reused holdout
training_selected_spend_cap: 1850.0
A.4 Required Tables and Plots in the Final Results
The completed figures and tables cover source availability and panel composition, identifiable artificial-
mask  recovery,  daily  reconstruction,  protected  forecasts  and  training  censoring  strata,  core 
cost/service/safety, matched parser–LLM outcomes, independent service–expiry and demand sensitivity, 
operating attempts and within-dataset M5 comparisons. Appendices retain all individual core runs and 
original M5 figures. Full sensitivity and exploratory transfer rows are accompanying CSVs. Human 
explanation outcomes, a full semantic-difficulty suite and production financial returns are not included 
because they were not measured.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 77 of 115
Appendix B Source-Field Checklist and Research Assumptions
B.1 Verified FreshRetailNet Public Fields
The  19  published  columns  were  verified  in  the  pinned  Parquet  files:  city_id,  store_id, 
management_group_id,  first_category_id,  second_category_id,  third_category_id,  product_id,  dt, 
sale_amount, hours_sale, stock_hour6_22_cnt, hours_stock_status, discount, holiday_flag, activity_flag, 
precpt, avg_temperature, avg_humidity and avg_wind_level. Sales/hierarchy and historical availability 
are used by the bounded adapter. Future realized contextual fields are not planning features (Dingdong-
Inc, 2025).
B.2 Fields That Must Never Be Described as Observed
Neither  public  dataset  provides  the  complete  procurement  ledger  needed  for  real  replenishment 
outcomes. For FreshRetailNet in particular, any numerical current on-hand balance, supplier assignment, 
MOQ, purchase-order receipt, wholesale price, actual shelf life, expiry/waste quantity, or recovered 
latent demand is an experimental assumption or inference. The true counterfactual profit of alternative 
purchase policies is unavailable. This distinction must appear in the main text, tables, figures, and 
decision-trace interface.
B.3 Benchmark Counting and Data Version Caveats
The published FreshRetailNet paper reports 863 perishable SKUs, while the dataset card reports 865. 
The dissertation reports the distinct identifier count computed from its pinned file, alongside those two 
publication values. The dataset card's approximately 20% stockout frequency refers to hourly exposure; a 
daily row with at least one unavailable hour represents a different rate. The train/evaluation counts are 
4,500,000 and 350,000 rows in the documented release, and these figures are verified programmatically 
before they are included as results.
B.4 Interpretation of Financial and Sustainability Outcomes
FreshRetailNet sales are normalized, and actual spoilage outcomes are not released. The dissertation 
therefore reports operating-cost indexes and simulated expiry effects rather than real gross margin, 
revenue, or tonnes of avoided food waste. A scenario can be compared fairly across two controllers only 
when they share the same scaling convention, demand generator, and economic assumptions. There is no 
valid conversion from those model outputs to a real company's financial savings without independent 
evidence.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 78 of 115
Appendix C Completed Studies and Remaining Evidence Gaps
C.1 Completed Evidence
The archived pilot report and result CSV supplied with the dissertation record 32 completed M5 
simulator runs across four scenarios (normal, capacity cut, feed gap, and derived-field collapse), two 
seeds, and four controller/recovery arms. They contain 448 decision traces and 68 captured LLM 
attempts. The study panel has only thirty item-store series. The matched LLM and deterministic-parser 
outcomes were identical. Recovery improved results under the inventory-derived-field collapse in both 
controller families. Verification prevented ten inappropriate recovery requests from the model selector. 
These findings are reported as descriptive pilot evidence only.
C.2 Not Yet Evaluated
Unevaluated commitments include full-population FreshRetailNet modeling, ground truth for naturally 
unserved demand, all B1–B11 architecture ablations, independent heterogeneous supplier-language tests, 
a formal human audit and actual ERP purchasing. Completed 30-series forecasts, recovery tests and 
simulator runs are reported in the following appendices. Unexecuted tests have no invented outcome.
C.3 Reporting Safeguard
Final manuscript revisions should promote a planned hypothesis into a results claim only when it is 
supported by a saved run artifact, a verified source sample, and the relevant analysis. A result from the 
FreshRetailNet paper by Wang et al. (2025) or from Azar (2026) may be discussed in the literature 
review but must not be re-labelled as an experiment conducted for this dissertation. Likewise, the 
existing small M5 pilot cannot be described as a complete 30,490-series evaluation.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 79 of 115
Appendix D FreshRetailNet Results and Artifact Register
D.1 Artifact guide and exact run-level results
The accompanying files preserve every completed individual run. Numerical, live-agent and 
independent-policy CSVs have 360, 32 and 1,140 rows respectively. Forecast files contain series/day 
predictions, observable targets and flags used only for scoring. Artificial-mask files retain each hidden 
target. Audit files contain model calls, grounding, selector and decision records.
The report directory contains FreshRetailNet_numerical_all_runs.csv, 
FreshRetailNet_agent_all_runs.csv and FreshRetailNet_policy_sensitivity_all_runs.csv, as well as their 
descriptive means and matched contrasts. M5_FreshRetailNet_descriptive_comparison.csv records the 
compatible relative comparisons. The full evidence archive adds raw objects, saved models, frozen code, 
source receipts and failed attempts.
Selected computational panel
Series
Stratum
Train mean sales
Train stockout share
FRN_0247@S0020
2
0.38677
22.28%
FRN_0363@S0021
2
0.39774
26.31%
FRN_0210@S0054
2
0.33565
23.69%
FRN_0218@S0137
1
0.90758
17.34%
FRN_0635@S0156
1
0.81226
18.25%
FRN_0422@S0173
1
0.93710
20.26%
FRN_0738@S0181
2
0.28823
23.69%
FRN_0190@S0191
0
0.83548
8.87%
FRN_0295@S0202
1
0.37645
18.95%
FRN_0653@S0202
0
0.35194
14.82%
FRN_0635@S0219
1
0.42403
17.84%
FRN_0473@S0231
0
0.51613
15.02%
FRN_0802@S0259
0
0.84839
15.93%
FRN_0769@S0298
0
0.70000
12.80%
FRN_0843@S0300
2
0.54355
32.66%
FRN_0682@S0301
0
0.96290
9.78%
FRN_0834@S0334
2
0.51290
60.38%
FRN_0802@S0355
1
0.72097
16.43%
FRN_0810@S0410
0
0.48903
9.98%
FRN_0715@S0413
2
0.35452
23.69%
FRN_0650@S0423
0
0.45597
14.72%
FRN_0729@S0474
0
0.49355
10.99%
FRN_0218@S0482
0
0.66452
11.39%
FRN_0620@S0484
1
0.60774
19.35%
FRN_0577@S0521
1
0.42242
17.34%
FRN_0834@S0649
2
0.92419
45.77%
FRN_0560@S0805
1
0.57726
17.74%
FRN_0074@S0851
2
0.55387
22.18%
FRN_0402@S0861
1
0.56629
19.56%
FRN_0379@S0877
2
0.54516
55.44%


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 80 of 115
D.2 Core individual runs — Normal
All 30 seeds per policy
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B1
0
17,735.329
78.80%
27.62%
0
7
B1
1
16,579.451
81.03%
27.62%
0
6
B1
2
17,420.022
79.04%
28.57%
0
7
B1
3
18,125.015
77.93%
30.00%
0
6
B1
4
19,701.915
74.99%
30.95%
0
7
B1
5
17,780.512
77.92%
29.05%
0
7
B1
6
19,138.125
75.20%
31.90%
0
7
B1
7
18,583.141
77.28%
29.05%
0
7
B1
8
17,731.543
78.18%
29.05%
0
7
B1
9
20,937.615
70.63%
35.71%
0
7
B1
10
16,176.249
81.99%
23.33%
0
7
B1
11
19,119.515
75.78%
31.43%
0
7
B1
12
19,894.785
73.82%
30.00%
0
7
B1
13
18,242.236
77.23%
29.52%
0
7
B1
14
19,224.607
76.77%
30.00%
0
7
B1
15
18,838.073
76.21%
26.67%
0
8
B1
16
18,331.092
76.75%
26.67%
0
7
B1
17
17,990.827
78.62%
31.43%
0
7
B1
18
18,288.650
77.44%
30.95%
0
7
B1
19
16,198.008
82.75%
24.76%
0
7
B1
20
18,173.944
78.53%
26.19%
0
7
B1
21
18,464.016
76.82%
27.14%
0
7
B1
22
17,714.833
79.14%
25.24%
0
7
B1
23
18,081.225
77.84%
29.52%
0
7
B1
24
17,709.263
78.39%
29.52%
0
7
B1
25
18,315.159
76.78%
26.67%
0
8
B1
26
17,002.835
81.65%
23.81%
0
7
B1
27
18,872.682
77.91%
29.52%
0
7
B1
28
19,199.945
75.61%
33.81%
0
7
B1
29
19,139.064
75.72%
28.10%
0
7
B2
0
18,714.549
73.04%
32.86%
0
6
B2
1
19,450.479
70.16%
36.67%
0
4
B2
2
18,221.380
71.89%
33.33%
0
7
B2
3
20,319.804
68.74%
35.71%
0
6
B2
4
20,524.152
68.68%
35.24%
0
7
B2
5
20,375.280
67.35%
37.14%
0
5
B2
6
20,247.988
69.68%
36.19%
0
7
B2
7
20,150.511
68.26%
35.71%
0
7
B2
8
20,921.230
65.55%
38.10%
0
7
B2
9
22,216.301
64.51%
38.10%
0
7
B2
10
18,691.531
72.37%
33.81%
0
6
B2
11
19,969.856
68.91%
35.71%
0
4
B2
12
20,875.138
67.17%
38.57%
0
7
B2
13
19,058.313
71.17%
37.14%
0
5
B2
14
21,143.615
67.12%
36.67%
0
6
B2
15
20,538.898
66.91%
37.62%
0
7
B2
16
19,760.069
69.79%
32.38%
0
6
B2
17
17,376.287
75.41%
33.81%
0
7
B2
18
19,133.461
69.75%
35.24%
0
6


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 81 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B2
19
17,718.816
74.84%
30.95%
0
6
B2
20
20,228.331
69.08%
38.57%
0
7
B2
21
20,047.329
68.73%
37.14%
0
6
B2
22
19,655.185
70.05%
34.76%
0
6
B2
23
18,658.486
71.88%
33.81%
0
7
B2
24
20,149.638
68.19%
39.05%
0
7
B2
25
18,722.456
71.34%
32.86%
0
6
B2
26
19,227.461
71.22%
34.76%
0
7
B2
27
18,135.282
73.70%
34.29%
0
7
B2
28
20,076.943
68.79%
37.62%
0
7
B2
29
20,254.479
67.94%
35.24%
0
7
B3
0
18,834.188
85.17%
19.52%
0
0
B3
1
18,489.906
86.17%
17.14%
0
0
B3
2
18,667.147
84.51%
17.62%
0
0
B3
3
19,054.028
83.53%
24.29%
0
0
B3
4
20,285.256
81.83%
26.19%
0
0
B3
5
19,219.266
84.43%
20.95%
0
0
B3
6
17,918.294
88.27%
16.19%
0
0
B3
7
18,421.132
85.98%
18.57%
0
0
B3
8
18,481.642
85.25%
20.95%
0
0
B3
9
20,756.792
80.59%
27.62%
0
0
B3
10
18,482.335
86.34%
18.10%
0
0
B3
11
20,111.100
81.98%
21.43%
0
0
B3
12
20,453.425
82.34%
21.90%
0
0
B3
13
17,996.392
85.59%
19.52%
0
0
B3
14
19,358.248
83.05%
22.86%
0
0
B3
15
17,988.876
86.53%
15.71%
0
0
B3
16
18,656.536
84.80%
19.05%
0
0
B3
17
17,781.322
87.27%
20.00%
0
0
B3
18
20,510.611
80.13%
24.76%
0
0
B3
19
16,054.654
91.33%
16.67%
0
0
B3
20
18,379.175
85.74%
20.48%
0
0
B3
21
19,573.899
83.19%
23.81%
0
0
B3
22
18,493.814
85.83%
17.62%
0
0
B3
23
17,458.419
88.26%
17.14%
0
0
B3
24
18,711.980
85.16%
20.48%
0
0
B3
25
18,223.855
86.36%
15.71%
0
0
B3
26
18,638.899
85.59%
20.00%
0
0
B3
27
18,396.860
85.75%
18.57%
0
0
B3
28
18,730.647
85.91%
20.48%
0
0
B3
29
19,692.291
83.95%
19.05%
0
0
B4
0
24,488.115
42.27%
60.95%
7
0
B4
1
25,521.012
39.25%
60.95%
7
0
B4
2
23,654.760
43.89%
56.67%
7
0
B4
3
23,251.410
45.19%
59.05%
7
0
B4
4
24,019.237
44.22%
55.24%
7
0
B4
5
24,508.003
41.92%
60.95%
7
0
B4
6
22,696.454
47.58%
52.86%
7
0
B4
7
23,110.907
45.83%
54.76%
7
0
B4
8
25,396.775
39.78%
60.95%
7
0
B4
9
26,169.138
38.52%
61.90%
7
0
B4
10
23,095.977
45.08%
56.19%
7
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 82 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B4
11
23,592.960
45.42%
56.19%
7
0
B4
12
25,421.616
40.38%
60.95%
7
0
B4
13
22,258.569
47.43%
53.33%
7
0
B4
14
25,075.476
40.86%
60.95%
7
0
B4
15
23,274.089
45.64%
55.24%
7
0
B4
16
24,461.748
42.52%
57.62%
7
0
B4
17
24,095.772
43.55%
56.67%
7
0
B4
18
23,666.492
44.01%
56.67%
7
0
B4
19
22,742.703
45.99%
55.24%
7
0
B4
20
24,289.215
42.78%
61.43%
7
0
B4
21
24,624.152
42.41%
59.05%
7
0
B4
22
22,626.153
46.72%
55.24%
7
0
B4
23
23,949.690
43.01%
59.52%
7
0
B4
24
22,468.061
47.18%
57.62%
7
0
B4
25
24,722.401
41.14%
55.71%
7
0
B4
26
23,381.589
45.43%
56.67%
7
0
B4
27
22,401.393
47.23%
53.81%
7
0
B4
28
27,026.395
36.69%
61.90%
7
0
B4
29
24,404.020
42.93%
57.62%
7
0
D.2 Core individual runs — Inventory-field fault
All 30 seeds per policy
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B1
0
17,611.796
80.89%
23.81%
0
9
B1
1
17,589.209
80.09%
26.67%
0
7
B1
2
18,685.214
78.41%
25.71%
0
10
B1
3
17,961.443
80.07%
29.05%
0
9
B1
4
19,659.989
76.54%
28.10%
0
10
B1
5
17,568.577
80.82%
29.05%
0
8
B1
6
18,918.969
76.56%
29.52%
0
10
B1
7
18,806.993
78.62%
26.67%
0
10
B1
8
19,059.460
75.85%
31.90%
0
9
B1
9
21,289.694
71.65%
33.33%
0
8
B1
10
17,013.616
81.32%
23.33%
0
8
B1
11
18,275.851
78.94%
29.52%
0
9
B1
12
19,382.016
77.21%
28.10%
0
9
B1
13
18,608.672
77.57%
28.57%
0
9
B1
14
19,359.835
79.00%
26.19%
0
8
B1
15
18,303.688
79.36%
24.76%
0
12
B1
16
19,139.488
75.91%
27.62%
0
9
B1
17
19,185.711
77.25%
30.95%
0
8
B1
18
18,520.027
78.35%
28.10%
0
7
B1
19
17,086.143
82.92%
20.48%
0
9
B1
20
19,148.857
79.62%
24.76%
0
8
B1
21
17,851.136
79.99%
25.24%
0
8
B1
22
17,942.610
79.55%
24.29%
0
10
B1
23
19,336.243
76.16%
28.57%
0
8
B1
24
17,585.124
80.62%
25.71%
0
9
B1
25
19,130.153
77.19%
25.71%
0
10
B1
26
16,293.325
85.01%
20.00%
0
8
B1
27
18,338.343
80.33%
25.24%
0
9


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 83 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B1
28
20,166.117
75.06%
30.95%
0
8
B1
29
20,488.995
73.67%
30.95%
0
10
B2
0
19,224.390
73.48%
31.43%
0
6
B2
1
18,885.377
73.69%
34.29%
0
7
B2
2
18,694.716
73.38%
30.95%
0
7
B2
3
19,100.233
73.24%
32.86%
0
8
B2
4
19,636.017
72.01%
30.95%
0
8
B2
5
19,643.144
71.80%
33.81%
0
6
B2
6
19,168.154
72.87%
32.86%
0
7
B2
7
19,560.190
72.15%
33.33%
0
8
B2
8
20,989.762
66.70%
36.67%
0
8
B2
9
21,858.340
66.05%
35.71%
0
8
B2
10
18,715.354
72.90%
33.81%
0
7
B2
11
18,352.859
73.56%
30.00%
0
5
B2
12
19,607.219
72.28%
33.33%
0
6
B2
13
18,729.918
73.90%
31.90%
0
7
B2
14
20,543.536
70.27%
34.29%
0
6
B2
15
18,394.891
74.70%
30.48%
0
7
B2
16
19,953.326
71.05%
31.43%
0
8
B2
17
16,720.617
79.08%
29.52%
0
5
B2
18
19,900.279
69.34%
32.86%
0
6
B2
19
16,832.209
79.17%
25.71%
0
7
B2
20
19,189.160
74.64%
32.38%
0
7
B2
21
19,267.769
73.14%
33.81%
0
6
B2
22
18,473.638
74.54%
30.48%
0
7
B2
23
19,915.621
70.34%
33.81%
0
8
B2
24
19,043.478
72.56%
35.71%
0
7
B2
25
18,339.779
75.53%
26.19%
0
7
B2
26
18,807.756
74.88%
30.48%
0
6
B2
27
17,459.968
77.19%
29.05%
0
5
B2
28
19,465.057
72.23%
32.86%
0
5
B2
29
20,701.076
69.50%
32.86%
0
9
B3
0
19,159.301
84.76%
20.48%
0
0
B3
1
18,207.028
86.83%
17.62%
0
0
B3
2
18,910.859
84.39%
17.14%
0
0
B3
3
18,824.738
84.91%
23.81%
0
0
B3
4
20,468.676
82.03%
24.76%
0
0
B3
5
19,807.642
83.44%
21.43%
0
0
B3
6
18,098.312
88.55%
14.76%
0
0
B3
7
19,213.589
85.01%
18.57%
0
0
B3
8
19,358.964
83.92%
21.90%
0
0
B3
9
20,934.487
80.31%
26.19%
0
0
B3
10
18,774.688
86.04%
17.62%
0
0
B3
11
20,378.474
82.13%
21.43%
0
0
B3
12
19,802.567
84.18%
21.43%
0
0
B3
13
18,029.206
85.94%
20.00%
0
0
B3
14
20,067.941
82.05%
24.29%
0
0
B3
15
18,315.320
86.83%
15.24%
0
0
B3
16
18,836.141
84.45%
19.52%
0
0
B3
17
17,830.934
87.53%
20.48%
0
0
B3
18
19,853.349
81.93%
22.86%
0
0
B3
19
16,183.520
91.47%
15.71%
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 84 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B3
20
18,550.147
85.44%
20.00%
0
0
B3
21
19,678.908
83.43%
23.33%
0
0
B3
22
18,593.378
86.19%
18.10%
0
0
B3
23
18,055.491
87.26%
18.10%
0
0
B3
24
18,953.864
85.31%
20.48%
0
0
B3
25
18,434.459
86.27%
15.71%
0
0
B3
26
18,888.526
86.04%
19.52%
0
0
B3
27
18,410.566
85.89%
18.10%
0
0
B3
28
19,522.936
84.32%
22.38%
0
0
B3
29
20,659.723
82.44%
20.00%
0
0
B4
0
24,488.115
42.27%
60.95%
7
0
B4
1
25,521.012
39.25%
60.95%
7
0
B4
2
23,654.760
43.89%
56.67%
7
0
B4
3
23,251.410
45.19%
59.05%
7
0
B4
4
24,019.237
44.22%
55.24%
7
0
B4
5
24,508.003
41.92%
60.95%
7
0
B4
6
22,696.454
47.58%
52.86%
7
0
B4
7
23,110.907
45.83%
54.76%
7
0
B4
8
25,396.775
39.78%
60.95%
7
0
B4
9
26,169.138
38.52%
61.90%
7
0
B4
10
23,095.977
45.08%
56.19%
7
0
B4
11
23,592.960
45.42%
56.19%
7
0
B4
12
25,421.616
40.38%
60.95%
7
0
B4
13
22,258.569
47.43%
53.33%
7
0
B4
14
25,075.476
40.86%
60.95%
7
0
B4
15
23,274.089
45.64%
55.24%
7
0
B4
16
24,461.748
42.52%
57.62%
7
0
B4
17
24,095.772
43.55%
56.67%
7
0
B4
18
23,666.492
44.01%
56.67%
7
0
B4
19
22,742.703
45.99%
55.24%
7
0
B4
20
24,289.215
42.78%
61.43%
7
0
B4
21
24,624.152
42.41%
59.05%
7
0
B4
22
22,626.153
46.72%
55.24%
7
0
B4
23
23,949.690
43.01%
59.52%
7
0
B4
24
22,468.061
47.18%
57.62%
7
0
B4
25
24,722.401
41.14%
55.71%
7
0
B4
26
23,381.589
45.43%
56.67%
7
0
B4
27
22,401.393
47.23%
53.81%
7
0
B4
28
27,026.395
36.69%
61.90%
7
0
B4
29
24,404.020
42.93%
57.62%
7
0
D.2 Core individual runs — Stale feed
All 30 seeds per policy
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B1
0
19,512.420
76.23%
29.52%
0
7
B1
1
17,789.008
78.99%
29.52%
0
6
B1
2
18,464.022
76.88%
27.62%
0
7
B1
3
18,885.500
77.44%
29.52%
0
7
B1
4
21,575.320
71.89%
34.29%
0
7
B1
5
18,314.971
77.65%
30.95%
0
7
B1
6
20,251.288
72.72%
31.43%
0
7


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 85 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B1
7
19,261.653
76.31%
29.52%
0
7
B1
8
20,248.948
72.98%
33.33%
0
7
B1
9
21,721.574
70.06%
36.67%
0
7
B1
10
17,104.856
80.92%
24.76%
0
7
B1
11
19,604.691
74.55%
33.33%
0
7
B1
12
22,158.547
69.08%
32.38%
0
7
B1
13
19,903.064
73.67%
31.90%
0
7
B1
14
20,886.125
74.43%
29.52%
0
7
B1
15
19,400.510
75.49%
30.00%
0
8
B1
16
20,417.276
71.54%
30.00%
0
5
B1
17
19,236.356
77.49%
30.48%
0
7
B1
18
19,505.589
75.26%
32.38%
0
7
B1
19
17,243.807
81.15%
26.19%
0
7
B1
20
18,857.179
77.74%
26.19%
0
7
B1
21
19,556.668
75.18%
29.52%
0
7
B1
22
18,601.854
78.16%
26.67%
0
7
B1
23
19,337.286
74.87%
31.90%
0
7
B1
24
19,385.310
74.23%
32.38%
0
7
B1
25
18,607.195
77.44%
26.67%
0
8
B1
26
18,492.408
78.89%
24.29%
0
7
B1
27
19,230.189
77.53%
28.10%
0
7
B1
28
19,309.966
76.31%
30.95%
0
7
B1
29
20,568.612
74.55%
30.48%
0
7
B2
0
23,223.296
65.09%
37.14%
0
7
B2
1
21,682.569
66.33%
39.52%
0
6
B2
2
21,849.802
64.26%
40.00%
0
7
B2
3
22,811.511
64.25%
40.48%
0
8
B2
4
22,376.619
65.28%
39.52%
0
7
B2
5
21,317.351
64.60%
40.48%
0
3
B2
6
21,716.401
66.17%
39.52%
0
8
B2
7
23,160.512
62.08%
40.48%
0
7
B2
8
25,032.830
59.20%
43.33%
0
6
B2
9
24,327.803
63.19%
40.95%
0
7
B2
10
21,270.958
67.97%
38.57%
0
6
B2
11
22,663.677
62.45%
40.48%
0
3
B2
12
24,527.174
60.83%
43.33%
0
7
B2
13
21,185.771
67.82%
36.67%
0
6
B2
14
24,928.814
62.76%
41.43%
0
7
B2
15
22,112.482
65.63%
40.48%
0
7
B2
16
22,560.230
62.85%
38.57%
0
6
B2
17
20,873.872
71.40%
38.10%
0
7
B2
18
22,333.899
63.95%
37.62%
0
4
B2
19
20,311.691
69.85%
34.76%
0
6
B2
20
21,149.794
69.26%
38.10%
0
7
B2
21
24,461.539
60.01%
45.24%
0
6
B2
22
21,273.712
67.88%
37.14%
0
5
B2
23
21,481.098
65.38%
42.38%
0
7
B2
24
22,977.143
62.41%
42.86%
0
6
B2
25
20,330.263
71.55%
33.33%
0
7
B2
26
22,702.083
65.02%
38.57%
0
6
B2
27
20,486.263
71.82%
34.29%
0
7
B2
28
23,435.644
64.00%
40.48%
0
7


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 86 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B2
29
22,755.512
66.08%
36.67%
0
7
B3
0
20,299.390
81.93%
23.33%
0
0
B3
1
19,181.198
84.36%
19.52%
0
0
B3
2
19,816.853
81.88%
20.48%
0
0
B3
3
20,192.821
81.83%
25.71%
0
0
B3
4
20,119.272
81.46%
27.62%
0
0
B3
5
18,839.755
84.72%
21.43%
0
0
B3
6
19,174.011
85.43%
18.57%
0
0
B3
7
18,986.265
85.21%
19.05%
0
0
B3
8
20,914.570
80.35%
24.29%
0
0
B3
9
20,949.736
80.29%
28.10%
0
0
B3
10
18,760.641
84.71%
20.00%
0
0
B3
11
20,951.077
81.03%
21.90%
0
0
B3
12
21,062.438
80.61%
24.29%
0
0
B3
13
18,908.825
83.84%
21.43%
0
0
B3
14
20,392.447
81.27%
25.71%
0
0
B3
15
18,900.140
85.14%
16.19%
0
0
B3
16
19,650.705
82.26%
19.52%
0
0
B3
17
18,012.580
86.77%
21.43%
0
0
B3
18
21,277.099
78.80%
25.24%
0
0
B3
19
17,616.039
88.01%
18.10%
0
0
B3
20
18,487.261
85.48%
20.48%
0
0
B3
21
20,091.646
82.37%
24.76%
0
0
B3
22
19,692.357
83.04%
19.52%
0
0
B3
23
18,598.392
85.74%
19.05%
0
0
B3
24
19,229.893
83.89%
21.43%
0
0
B3
25
19,035.589
84.51%
17.14%
0
0
B3
26
20,289.185
81.74%
23.81%
0
0
B3
27
18,815.932
85.06%
18.57%
0
0
B3
28
19,332.990
84.30%
23.33%
0
0
B3
29
20,631.400
82.26%
20.95%
0
0
B4
0
24,488.115
42.27%
60.95%
7
0
B4
1
25,521.012
39.25%
60.95%
7
0
B4
2
23,654.760
43.89%
56.67%
7
0
B4
3
23,251.410
45.19%
59.05%
7
0
B4
4
24,019.237
44.22%
55.24%
7
0
B4
5
24,508.003
41.92%
60.95%
7
0
B4
6
22,696.454
47.58%
52.86%
7
0
B4
7
23,110.907
45.83%
54.76%
7
0
B4
8
25,396.775
39.78%
60.95%
7
0
B4
9
26,169.138
38.52%
61.90%
7
0
B4
10
23,095.977
45.08%
56.19%
7
0
B4
11
23,592.960
45.42%
56.19%
7
0
B4
12
25,421.616
40.38%
60.95%
7
0
B4
13
22,258.569
47.43%
53.33%
7
0
B4
14
25,075.476
40.86%
60.95%
7
0
B4
15
23,274.089
45.64%
55.24%
7
0
B4
16
24,461.748
42.52%
57.62%
7
0
B4
17
24,095.772
43.55%
56.67%
7
0
B4
18
23,666.492
44.01%
56.67%
7
0
B4
19
22,742.703
45.99%
55.24%
7
0
B4
20
24,289.215
42.78%
61.43%
7
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 87 of 115
Policy
Seed
Cost
Fill
Stockout
Held
Violations
B4
21
24,624.152
42.41%
59.05%
7
0
B4
22
22,626.153
46.72%
55.24%
7
0
B4
23
23,949.690
43.01%
59.52%
7
0
B4
24
22,468.061
47.18%
57.62%
7
0
B4
25
24,722.401
41.14%
55.71%
7
0
B4
26
23,381.589
45.43%
56.67%
7
0
B4
27
22,401.393
47.23%
53.81%
7
0
B4
28
27,026.395
36.69%
61.90%
7
0
B4
29
24,404.020
42.93%
57.62%
7
0
D.3 Live-agent individual runs
All 32 live factorial runs
Arm
Scenario
Seed
Cost
Fill
Held
Violations
LLM
Capacity cut
13
20,589.055
59.41%
2
0
LLM
Capacity cut
29
22,556.878
55.46%
2
0
LLM
Inventory-field 
fault
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
LLM
Inventory-field 
fault
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
LLM
Stale feed
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
LLM
Stale feed
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
LLM
Normal
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
LLM
Normal
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
LLM + repair
Capacity cut
13
20,589.055
59.41%
2
0
LLM + repair
Capacity cut
29
22,556.878
55.46%
2
0
LLM + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
LLM + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
LLM + repair
Stale feed
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
LLM + repair
Stale feed
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
LLM + repair
Normal
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
LLM + repair
Normal
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
Parser
Capacity cut
13
20,589.055
59.41%
2
0
Parser
Capacity cut
29
22,556.878
55.46%
2
0
Parser
Inventory-field 
fault
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
Parser
Inventory-field 
fault
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
Parser
Stale feed
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
Parser
Stale feed
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
Parser
Normal
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
Parser
Normal
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
Parser + repair
Capacity cut
13
20,589.055
59.41%
2
0
Parser + repair
Capacity cut
29
22,556.878
55.46%
2
0
Parser + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
Parser + repair
Inventory-field 
fault
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
Parser + repair
Stale feed
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
Parser + repair
Stale feed
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0
Parser + repair
Normal
13
22,258.569
47.43%
7
0
Parser + repair
Normal
29
24,404.020
42.93%
7
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 88 of 115
Appendix E Complete M5 Figure Register
The previous M5 studies remain part of the comparative record. These original scientific figures are 
preserved from their final reports and describe earlier M5 windows. They are not FreshRetailNet results. 
The repository retains both original M5 PDFs, all 404 individual runs and the complete audit archives.
Figure E.1. Initial numerical study: cost and service across the three scenarios. Thirty seeds per 
policy/scenario; seven days; structured rules. These are simulated trade-offs, not LLM outcomes.
Figure E.2. V2 normal operation: cost and fill by configuration. Each configuration has two seeds and 
fourteen days. The LLM and parser means are identical.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 89 of 115
Figure E.3. Initial numerical study: hard violations and held decisions. Holds and violations are different 
endpoints; reference deviations are reported separately.
Figure E.4. V2 derived-field collapse: verified recovery restores cost and service in both parser and LLM 
configurations. The improvement is attributable to recovery.
Figure E.5. V2 supplier capacity cut: all configurations respect the active constraints. The LLM supplies 
a checked numeric term, not the final order quantity.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 90 of 115
Figure E.6. Initial live-model grounding: conditional tuple accuracy and document coverage. Accuracy is 
measured on submitted rules; unprocessed sources do not count as successful extraction.
Figure E.7. V2 derived-field collapse: inventory and decision latency. Service recovery and inference 
effort should be assessed together; local execution has no priced hosting estimate.
Figure E.8. V2 execution and safety: nonzero replenishment, holds and committed-plan violations. Zero 
committed violations does not imply zero semantic model errors.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 91 of 115
Figure E.9. Initial study completion by stage. Completed controls are not language-model runs; merged 
and worker copies are counted once.
Figure E.10. Forecast scores using the preferred pre-study holdout origins where available. Separate 
origins and models are descriptive; no confidence interval is implied.
Figure E.11. Development extraction timings for the candidate model profiles. Receiving a response does 
not establish extraction accuracy or policy benefit.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 92 of 115
Figure E.12. Two-day controlled-prose feasibility: all decisions were held. Initial stock served demand; 
low purchase cost is not an LLM saving.
Figure E.13. Two-day controlled-prose feasibility: reference deviations and execution. No live-model 
proposal reached the optimizer.
Figure E.14. Two-day controlled-prose feasibility summary. The horizon and document carrier differ 
from the numerical and V2 comparisons.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 93 of 115
Figure E.15. Two-day controlled-prose feasibility: violations and holds. A zero violation count in all-
held cases does not demonstrate executable replenishment.
Figure E.16. Thirty-seed numerical benchmark: clean-reference deviations and execution. Reference 
deviation is not the same as an actual hard violation.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 94 of 115
Figure E.17. Initial eight-seed numerical phase only. These 96 runs are a subset of the later verified 360-
run union, not additional observations to pool.
Figure E.18. Two-day structured-rule controls: cost and service. Orders create expenditure for future 
stock, without a terminal salvage credit.
Figure E.19. Two-day structured-rule controls: reference deviations and execution.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 95 of 115
Figure E.20. Two-day structured-rule control summary; one seed and two scenarios.
Figure E.21. Two-day structured-rule controls: hard violations and holds. These are deterministic 
controls, not model-generated decisions.
Figure E.22. V2 stale-feed cost and service. Recovery cannot repair absent current evidence; all 
parser/LLM matched outcomes remain identical.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 96 of 115
Figure E.23. V2 capacity-cut inventory and latency. Changed constraints are checked before numerical 
planning.
Figure E.24. V2 stale-feed inventory and latency. Held days must be assessed alongside service loss and 
review needs.
Figure E.25. V2 normal-operation inventory and latency. A language interface adds inference work 
without a measured operating advantage on this corpus.


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 97 of 115
Appendix F Complete Historical M5 Results
These tables retain every completed M5 run as historical evidence: 360 seven-day numerical controls, eight two-day prose feasibility runs, four two-day structured 
controls and 32 fourteen-day V2 runs. The stages are reported separately because their horizons and interventions differ. Simulated USD is the original M5 convention; 
it is not a currency conversion for FreshRetailNet.
Table F.1. Initial numerical study: B1, Derived-field collapse; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
580.844
94.091
1.429
261.857
73.648
0.791
0
0
7
1
600.789
91.818
3.810
222.857
43.670
0.906
0
0
6
2
605.788
87.727
4.286
236.429
35.049
0.816
0
0
6
3
680.328
95.909
0.952
266.143
73.244
0.793
0
0
6
4
678.667
95.000
1.905
298.429
54.686
0.700
0
0
6
5
635.819
93.636
1.905
277.143
77.946
0.743
0
0
4
6
541.950
97.727
0.952
241.429
51.508
0.891
0
0
6
7
674.733
91.818
2.381
285.143
72.593
0.708
0
0
5
8
676.918
92.273
1.429
280.571
65.194
0.724
0
0
6
9
667.022
85.455
4.286
228.000
55.514
0.825
0
0
5
10
580.279
94.545
2.857
246.857
71.252
0.843
0
0
4
11
656.122
95.000
1.429
296.429
51.062
0.705
0
0
4
12
657.478
94.545
1.905
273.571
58.458
0.760
0
0
5
13
587.079
90.909
3.333
255.714
43.648
0.782
0
0
7
14
591.957
92.727
1.429
250.000
45.033
0.816
0
0
5
15
539.382
92.273
3.810
217.286
31.523
0.934
0
0
7
16
534.790
94.091
0.952
252.571
53.041
0.820
0
0
6
17
628.433
90.455
3.333
250.857
29.274
0.793
0
0
6


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 98 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
18
580.608
91.364
2.381
223.714
41.356
0.898
0
0
7
19
613.120
92.727
1.905
261.571
81.347
0.780
0
0
6
20
736.048
93.636
2.857
293.714
69.236
0.701
0
0
7
21
604.112
93.636
3.333
259.429
46.882
0.794
0
0
5
22
605.147
92.273
2.381
257.143
34.685
0.789
0
0
6
23
576.364
98.182
1.429
239.429
44.377
0.902
0
0
7
24
629.771
90.909
3.810
252.000
50.949
0.794
0
0
6
25
622.803
90.909
1.905
247.714
43.441
0.807
0
0
7
26
567.485
91.818
3.333
209.286
28.716
0.965
0
0
7
27
637.631
93.182
1.429
271.571
48.974
0.755
0
0
7
28
653.200
91.364
1.429
259.143
54.502
0.776
0
0
7
29
687.348
93.182
1.429
249.143
58.575
0.823
0
0
6
Table F.2. Initial numerical study: B1, Feed gap; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
453.547
92.273
1.905
208.714
4.390
0.973
0
0
7
1
516.076
88.636
4.286
194.857
0.962
1.001
0
0
7
2
460.242
87.273
4.762
211.000
1.205
0.910
0
0
7
3
482.642
92.727
2.857
195.000
2.719
1.046
0
0
7
4
472.057
87.273
4.286
213.143
2.546
0.901
0
0
7
5
384.216
93.636
1.905
245.429
3.943
0.839
0
0
7
6
395.782
94.091
1.905
201.000
6.578
1.030
0
0
7
7
436.732
90.455
3.333
210.714
0.966
0.944
0
0
7
8
467.024
91.364
1.905
233.857
4.068
0.859
0
0
7
9
480.188
85.000
5.238
184.000
1.063
1.016
0
0
7
10
431.353
91.364
4.286
197.143
2.519
1.020
0
0
7


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 99 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
11
448.667
92.727
2.381
248.429
1.279
0.821
0
0
7
12
456.807
89.091
5.238
211.714
2.035
0.926
0
0
7
13
422.681
90.909
3.333
219.143
1.194
0.913
0
0
7
14
433.970
88.636
2.381
203.000
1.042
0.961
0
0
7
15
447.725
90.455
5.238
177.714
2.699
1.120
0
0
7
16
410.086
91.818
2.381
205.000
3.609
0.985
0
0
7
17
427.502
91.364
2.857
236.429
1.726
0.850
0
0
7
18
388.154
91.364
2.381
209.286
9.036
0.960
0
0
7
19
436.058
92.727
1.905
223.286
2.137
0.914
0
0
7
20
499.305
93.182
3.333
207.429
2.468
0.988
0
0
7
21
389.929
93.182
3.810
201.286
2.176
1.018
0
0
7
22
443.170
92.273
2.381
229.571
1.071
0.884
0
0
7
23
399.386
96.364
3.333
179.571
2.503
1.181
0
0
7
24
466.739
90.000
4.286
218.857
3.149
0.905
0
0
7
25
457.127
90.455
2.381
217.571
0.676
0.915
0
0
7
26
469.554
90.455
3.333
177.143
0.687
1.123
0
0
7
27
419.355
90.000
2.857
207.714
1.036
0.953
0
0
7
28
445.311
85.909
4.286
174.429
0.583
1.084
0
0
7
29
454.122
90.455
3.333
173.857
2.151
1.145
0
0
7
Table F.3. Initial numerical study: B1, Normal; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
427.941
94.091
1.429
218.000
3.412
0.950
0
0
7
1
426.077
91.818
3.810
193.143
1.867
1.046
0
0
7
2
433.769
87.727
4.286
213.429
1.733
0.904
0
0
6
3
376.813
94.545
2.381
183.571
0.788
1.133
0
0
7


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 100 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
4
375.439
94.091
2.381
215.143
2.194
0.962
0
0
7
5
375.320
93.636
1.905
244.000
1.689
0.844
0
0
7
6
347.486
97.273
1.429
200.857
1.856
1.065
0
0
7
7
395.907
91.818
2.381
218.286
3.565
0.925
0
0
7
8
391.873
92.273
1.429
232.714
1.719
0.872
0
0
7
9
459.809
84.545
4.286
179.857
0.950
1.034
0
0
7
10
391.769
93.182
3.333
201.143
3.580
1.019
0
0
7
11
360.191
95.000
1.429
247.143
1.719
0.846
0
0
7
12
420.493
90.000
3.810
212.286
1.689
0.933
0
0
7
13
382.606
90.909
3.333
219.286
1.147
0.912
0
0
7
14
380.727
91.364
2.381
203.857
1.435
0.986
0
0
7
15
413.080
90.000
5.714
170.143
1.752
1.164
0
0
7
16
345.932
93.636
1.429
203.714
3.835
1.011
0
0
7
17
423.607
90.455
3.333
234.571
1.124
0.848
0
0
7
18
395.513
91.364
2.381
209.571
3.593
0.959
0
0
7
19
417.142
92.727
1.905
219.714
0.928
0.928
0
0
7
20
437.309
93.636
2.857
203.286
2.497
1.013
0
0
7
21
402.809
91.818
2.857
199.857
2.368
1.011
0
0
7
22
400.968
92.273
2.381
226.571
1.877
0.896
0
0
7
23
378.786
98.182
1.429
185.429
1.855
1.165
0
0
7
24
432.461
90.000
4.286
218.714
1.529
0.905
0
0
7
25
402.264
90.909
1.905
215.571
1.018
0.928
0
0
7
26
429.032
90.909
4.286
177.429
1.653
1.127
0
0
7
27
364.765
92.727
1.905
206.000
0.758
0.990
0
0
7
28
394.891
89.091
3.333
175.143
1.905
1.119
0
0
7


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 101 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
29
410.619
91.364
2.857
171.857
2.674
1.170
0
0
7
Table F.4. Initial numerical study: B2, Derived-field collapse; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
442.620
90.455
2.857
234.571
55.452
0.848
0
0
5
1
550.061
82.273
6.190
203.857
46.002
0.888
0
0
6
2
531.775
81.818
6.190
216.286
39.000
0.832
0
0
4
3
509.095
92.273
2.381
204.429
47.238
0.993
0
0
5
4
551.962
88.636
2.857
256.571
62.758
0.760
0
0
4
5
558.581
83.636
4.286
245.857
76.143
0.748
0
0
3
6
455.358
89.091
5.238
216.571
45.838
0.905
0
0
4
7
509.624
92.273
1.905
240.857
39.663
0.843
0
0
3
8
584.858
87.273
2.857
261.714
69.405
0.734
0
0
3
9
599.004
81.364
5.238
204.429
33.558
0.876
0
0
4
10
522.896
85.455
5.238
220.143
48.942
0.854
0
0
3
11
565.885
81.364
4.762
256.857
33.643
0.697
0
0
5
12
593.948
84.545
5.714
247.429
51.897
0.752
0
0
4
13
533.309
85.000
5.238
237.000
54.527
0.789
0
0
3
14
611.986
78.182
4.762
221.571
45.233
0.776
0
0
4
15
531.119
86.364
6.190
194.714
28.095
0.976
0
0
5
16
552.544
85.000
4.286
236.000
48.989
0.792
0
0
6
17
593.748
80.455
5.714
234.000
41.604
0.756
0
0
3
18
563.209
80.000
5.714
208.286
55.463
0.845
0
0
3
19
524.788
86.364
4.286
236.000
70.471
0.805
0
0
3
20
568.176
86.818
4.286
239.429
29.763
0.798
0
0
5
21
575.580
83.636
5.714
233.000
39.441
0.790
0
0
4


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 102 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
22
559.922
83.636
4.762
222.571
40.494
0.827
0
0
3
23
504.483
90.455
2.857
209.143
35.658
0.952
0
0
5
24
591.026
82.727
5.714
242.571
74.770
0.750
0
0
4
25
573.241
85.000
3.810
227.429
44.564
0.822
0
0
4
26
566.234
80.909
6.667
188.857
46.698
0.943
0
0
5
27
589.727
80.909
4.286
230.857
36.604
0.771
0
0
5
28
539.287
87.727
4.286
223.000
32.282
0.865
0
0
4
29
515.095
91.818
2.857
192.143
49.129
1.051
0
0
3
Table F.5. Initial numerical study: B2, Feed gap; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
369.753
80.455
5.714
189.714
6.850
0.933
0
0
3
1
481.586
75.455
8.095
173.286
3.804
0.958
0
0
6
2
405.321
79.091
6.667
189.286
2.144
0.919
0
0
6
3
437.455
78.636
9.048
139.429
3.602
1.241
0
0
4
4
466.180
75.000
7.143
183.000
6.347
0.902
0
0
5
5
356.344
82.727
4.762
215.571
8.936
0.844
0
0
2
6
389.796
81.364
7.143
184.571
5.355
0.970
0
0
6
7
429.411
77.727
5.238
177.714
6.806
0.962
0
0
2
8
308.103
85.455
3.810
215.000
5.497
0.874
0
0
2
9
557.206
66.818
10.000
153.000
11.101
0.961
0
0
3
10
452.514
74.545
9.048
177.714
5.391
0.923
0
0
4
11
405.040
79.091
6.190
217.429
6.634
0.800
0
0
5
12
456.908
77.727
8.095
178.429
3.181
0.958
0
0
5
13
394.538
80.455
5.714
200.857
3.357
0.881
0
0
5
14
498.013
70.909
8.095
180.429
7.996
0.865
0
0
2


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 103 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
15
509.456
71.818
12.857
148.571
1.166
1.063
0
0
7
16
412.066
79.545
7.619
180.000
6.258
0.972
0
0
3
17
396.831
80.000
6.190
214.429
6.517
0.821
0
0
5
18
421.931
80.000
5.714
194.286
4.813
0.906
0
0
5
19
406.748
80.909
5.238
197.143
18.343
0.903
0
0
2
20
419.921
80.909
5.714
173.429
8.279
1.026
0
0
5
21
524.975
68.182
10.476
170.143
4.487
0.882
0
0
4
22
352.414
82.273
5.714
196.857
5.839
0.919
0
0
4
23
507.455
75.000
7.619
154.571
6.505
1.067
0
0
7
24
466.837
75.909
7.619
201.143
6.301
0.830
0
0
4
25
366.120
81.364
6.190
191.000
3.678
0.937
0
0
4
26
564.985
68.636
10.952
150.571
8.831
1.003
0
0
5
27
512.146
76.818
6.190
191.857
5.748
0.881
0
0
6
28
450.603
76.364
9.524
153.000
2.548
1.098
0
0
6
29
481.324
74.091
10.000
124.000
7.990
1.315
0
0
4
Table F.6. Initial numerical study: B2, Normal; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
301.064
88.636
4.286
194.857
1.965
1.001
0
0
6
1
419.940
81.818
6.667
176.143
2.077
1.022
0
0
7
2
363.764
81.818
6.190
192.000
1.947
0.938
0
0
5
3
473.391
77.273
8.571
145.714
2.735
1.167
0
0
5
4
368.462
83.636
5.714
186.143
1.201
0.988
0
0
6
5
356.494
82.727
4.762
215.571
1.785
0.844
0
0
4
6
362.434
82.273
6.667
184.143
2.940
0.983
0
0
6
7
401.815
83.182
4.286
181.429
4.236
1.009
0
0
5


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 104 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
8
321.382
85.455
3.810
217.571
1.283
0.864
0
0
5
9
435.857
77.727
8.095
157.857
3.011
1.083
0
0
5
10
355.952
83.636
6.667
188.143
3.392
0.978
0
0
4
11
391.441
79.545
5.714
219.000
1.164
0.799
0
0
6
12
385.545
80.455
8.095
182.143
0.954
0.972
0
0
5
13
328.913
85.000
5.238
202.857
0.923
0.922
0
0
5
14
451.455
75.455
7.619
184.429
1.518
0.900
0
0
5
15
467.125
77.273
10.476
155.286
2.172
1.095
0
0
6
16
390.689
81.818
6.190
184.143
3.216
0.978
0
0
5
17
412.291
80.000
6.190
214.429
2.569
0.821
0
0
5
18
417.287
80.000
5.714
194.286
2.162
0.906
0
0
5
19
413.252
80.909
5.238
197.143
3.210
0.903
0
0
4
20
356.139
85.909
4.762
174.429
2.476
1.084
0
0
7
21
440.575
77.727
6.667
180.714
1.579
0.946
0
0
6
22
332.206
82.273
5.714
199.571
1.953
0.907
0
0
4
23
445.634
81.818
5.714
161.857
0.935
1.112
0
0
7
24
415.406
80.909
6.667
204.000
1.779
0.873
0
0
6
25
357.617
84.091
4.762
192.429
0.590
0.961
0
0
6
26
475.234
75.455
9.524
153.571
1.407
1.081
0
0
6
27
448.054
77.727
5.714
192.143
1.158
0.890
0
0
6
28
433.716
76.364
9.048
154.857
1.903
1.085
0
0
4
29
465.747
78.182
8.095
131.714
2.544
1.306
0
0
5
Table F.7. Initial numerical study: B3, Derived-field collapse; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
439.866
95.909
1.905
217.571
13.219
0.970
0
0
4


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 105 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
1
489.219
88.182
3.810
172.714
9.275
1.123
0
0
2
2
481.347
91.364
2.857
184.714
8.423
1.088
0
0
3
3
593.887
95.909
1.429
253.429
32.880
0.833
0
0
2
4
535.276
92.273
1.905
229.857
25.378
0.883
0
0
2
5
435.261
90.909
2.857
219.143
14.608
0.913
0
0
4
6
482.820
91.364
3.810
202.857
10.897
0.991
0
0
3
7
488.040
98.182
1.429
261.714
41.732
0.825
0
0
2
8
475.448
94.545
2.381
239.286
25.149
0.869
0
0
3
9
549.855
94.091
1.429
223.714
24.415
0.925
0
0
2
10
491.177
96.364
0.952
219.714
22.533
0.965
0
0
1
11
485.073
91.818
2.381
235.714
19.124
0.857
0
0
1
12
475.349
96.818
0.476
242.000
38.702
0.880
0
0
2
13
391.486
93.636
1.429
215.000
19.859
0.958
0
0
2
14
512.646
93.636
2.381
214.143
14.187
0.962
0
0
3
15
512.774
94.545
0.952
217.143
20.231
0.958
0
0
3
16
504.385
93.636
0.952
226.143
25.361
0.911
0
0
3
17
455.242
90.909
3.810
208.143
7.777
0.961
0
0
3
18
448.193
90.909
4.286
185.714
11.151
1.077
0
0
3
19
458.832
91.818
3.810
209.571
17.728
0.964
0
0
4
20
579.008
92.727
3.333
229.571
35.758
0.889
0
0
3
21
554.454
98.636
0.476
284.000
30.370
0.764
0
0
3
22
447.659
92.727
2.381
210.143
22.027
0.971
0
0
4
23
559.739
95.000
2.381
228.000
32.030
0.917
0
0
3
24
434.741
96.818
1.905
227.286
7.129
0.937
0
0
2
25
452.407
94.091
1.905
204.857
15.000
1.010
0
0
3


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 106 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
26
534.844
92.273
2.857
181.571
12.105
1.118
0
0
1
27
464.362
93.636
1.905
208.143
10.386
0.990
0
0
3
28
596.584
93.636
0.952
247.714
33.902
0.832
0
0
3
29
581.406
95.000
0.952
222.143
27.574
0.941
0
0
1
Table F.8. Initial numerical study: B3, Feed gap; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
326.618
94.545
2.857
181.857
3.413
1.144
0
2
2
1
523.324
83.636
6.190
154.571
3.069
1.190
0
2
2
2
419.805
88.636
3.333
170.000
1.065
1.147
0
3
0
3
529.969
89.091
4.286
167.857
2.130
1.168
0
3
1
4
437.249
88.636
6.190
169.429
0.284
1.151
0
3
0
5
299.497
92.727
2.857
192.571
2.486
1.059
0
2
1
6
414.194
89.091
4.762
169.571
2.604
1.156
0
2
1
7
371.522
97.727
1.905
199.857
3.001
1.076
0
2
1
8
254.657
97.273
1.905
190.857
1.993
1.121
0
0
4
9
497.763
89.091
3.810
169.429
1.826
1.157
0
3
0
10
413.192
94.545
2.381
188.429
2.149
1.104
0
1
2
11
349.793
91.818
3.333
202.714
1.446
0.996
0
3
0
12
425.813
86.818
6.667
166.857
2.907
1.145
0
3
1
13
323.446
92.727
1.905
189.000
1.906
1.079
0
3
0
14
485.673
84.545
6.667
176.286
1.013
1.055
0
2
1
15
549.822
90.455
3.333
189.286
7.208
1.051
0
1
2
16
390.510
89.545
3.333
167.571
6.772
1.176
0
3
0
17
418.278
90.909
3.333
190.714
1.972
1.049
0
3
0
18
395.155
87.273
4.762
173.143
2.569
1.109
0
2
1


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 107 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
19
436.883
88.182
4.762
181.286
1.877
1.070
0
3
2
20
418.359
90.455
5.238
165.571
1.711
1.202
0
2
2
21
509.666
90.455
3.333
211.714
7.502
0.940
0
1
3
22
345.444
90.000
4.286
166.714
3.868
1.188
0
3
1
23
461.991
90.909
3.333
157.857
4.337
1.267
0
2
1
24
410.656
90.455
4.762
202.571
8.565
0.982
0
0
3
25
412.484
86.818
5.714
175.571
1.594
1.088
0
2
1
26
503.949
89.545
4.762
145.286
3.136
1.356
0
2
1
27
468.920
88.182
3.810
177.429
2.154
1.093
0
2
1
28
477.102
91.364
2.381
178.000
2.144
1.129
0
2
1
29
495.359
93.182
2.381
161.000
2.906
1.273
0
1
2
Table F.9. Initial numerical study: B3, Normal; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
320.042
98.182
0.952
179.286
3.138
1.205
0
0
0
1
386.882
93.182
1.905
146.429
3.429
1.400
0
0
1
2
378.872
91.818
3.810
159.714
3.407
1.265
0
0
0
3
396.710
95.455
1.905
161.714
1.953
1.299
0
0
0
4
384.803
95.000
1.905
162.857
2.490
1.283
0
0
0
5
298.615
93.182
2.381
190.571
4.864
1.076
0
0
0
6
381.362
92.727
1.905
164.857
5.980
1.237
0
0
0
7
362.470
97.273
1.905
206.857
7.629
1.035
0
0
0
8
271.920
97.273
1.429
184.143
1.285
1.162
0
0
0
9
481.100
91.364
2.381
182.286
2.696
1.103
0
0
1
10
409.881
94.545
1.905
184.000
6.548
1.130
0
0
0
11
364.008
92.273
2.381
200.143
1.547
1.014
0
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 108 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
12
354.187
92.273
2.381
172.000
2.388
1.180
0
0
0
13
339.547
92.273
2.857
185.857
6.262
1.092
0
0
0
14
442.746
89.545
4.762
181.429
1.376
1.086
0
0
0
15
431.136
94.545
0.952
167.143
0.978
1.244
0
0
1
16
349.777
93.636
0.952
167.000
3.585
1.234
0
0
1
17
315.878
94.545
3.333
185.286
2.050
1.123
0
0
0
18
333.663
93.182
3.810
168.143
4.469
1.219
0
0
1
19
378.203
94.091
2.381
176.571
3.519
1.172
0
0
1
20
383.219
94.091
2.381
172.286
3.940
1.201
0
0
0
21
428.192
96.364
1.429
202.714
6.337
1.046
0
0
1
22
320.705
95.455
3.333
165.000
5.749
1.273
0
0
1
23
443.282
92.727
2.857
163.429
4.801
1.248
0
0
0
24
324.717
97.727
0.952
200.857
3.774
1.070
0
0
0
25
310.064
96.364
1.905
171.000
1.536
1.240
0
0
1
26
395.072
92.273
3.333
142.857
3.897
1.421
0
0
0
27
393.204
92.273
2.381
175.714
1.103
1.155
0
0
0
28
441.395
90.909
1.905
163.000
2.735
1.227
0
0
1
29
439.198
94.091
1.905
157.857
2.949
1.311
0
0
0
Table F.10. Initial numerical study: B4, Derived-field collapse; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
303.053
95.909
1.429
184.571
7.241
1.143
3
0
0
1
396.408
87.273
4.286
153.143
11.240
1.254
3
0
1
2
366.133
88.182
4.762
169.857
5.108
1.142
3
0
0
3
424.469
89.545
4.286
160.571
8.745
1.227
3
0
0
4
386.805
89.545
2.381
165.000
10.447
1.194
3
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 109 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
5
318.722
89.545
3.810
198.714
8.105
0.991
3
0
0
6
384.435
87.273
6.190
171.286
7.347
1.121
3
0
0
7
461.449
84.545
5.714
182.000
15.848
1.022
3
0
0
8
266.395
93.636
2.857
198.571
6.640
1.037
3
0
0
9
417.995
91.364
3.333
159.714
16.684
1.258
3
0
0
10
429.800
88.636
4.762
176.857
23.623
1.103
3
0
0
11
325.677
90.909
2.857
204.000
8.837
0.980
3
0
0
12
338.401
90.909
3.333
165.714
15.270
1.207
3
0
0
13
301.053
92.273
2.381
185.286
9.396
1.096
3
0
0
14
356.771
90.455
3.810
170.571
10.808
1.167
3
0
0
15
403.855
92.727
2.381
153.857
14.442
1.326
3
0
1
16
343.798
90.455
2.857
171.143
9.744
1.163
3
0
0
17
352.806
89.091
4.286
193.143
4.652
1.015
3
0
0
18
333.957
89.091
4.762
175.571
8.520
1.116
3
0
0
19
359.715
90.455
4.762
180.286
9.432
1.104
3
0
1
20
444.973
85.455
5.714
159.571
16.258
1.178
3
0
0
21
402.489
95.909
1.905
193.857
15.724
1.088
3
0
0
22
293.166
92.273
2.857
173.286
7.032
1.171
3
0
1
23
382.948
93.636
3.333
154.286
10.912
1.335
3
0
0
24
294.758
97.273
1.429
202.000
8.510
1.059
3
0
1
25
306.391
94.091
1.905
175.000
5.627
1.183
3
0
1
26
399.746
90.909
3.810
140.857
20.239
1.420
3
0
0
27
423.914
85.000
5.238
168.286
12.272
1.111
3
0
0
28
400.945
91.364
2.857
150.143
16.582
1.339
3
0
0
29
461.650
87.273
5.238
142.857
18.639
1.344
3
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 110 of 115
Table F.11. Initial numerical study: B4, Feed gap; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
306.083
95.909
1.429
184.429
7.337
1.144
3
0
0
1
391.109
87.273
4.286
153.429
10.667
1.251
3
0
1
2
366.133
88.182
4.762
169.857
5.108
1.142
3
0
0
3
424.469
89.545
4.286
160.571
8.745
1.227
3
0
0
4
386.805
89.545
2.381
165.000
10.447
1.194
3
0
0
5
299.313
90.909
2.857
199.571
8.105
1.002
3
0
0
6
384.435
87.273
6.190
171.286
7.347
1.121
3
0
0
7
455.897
85.000
5.714
181.571
15.693
1.030
3
0
0
8
266.395
93.636
2.857
198.571
6.640
1.037
3
0
0
9
417.715
91.364
3.333
159.857
16.684
1.257
3
0
0
10
433.089
88.182
4.762
177.286
23.260
1.094
3
0
0
11
330.077
90.909
2.857
204.000
9.047
0.980
3
0
0
12
338.401
90.909
3.333
165.714
15.270
1.207
3
0
0
13
301.053
92.273
2.381
185.286
9.396
1.096
3
0
0
14
356.771
90.455
3.810
170.571
10.808
1.167
3
0
0
15
403.855
92.727
2.381
153.857
14.442
1.326
3
0
0
16
343.800
90.455
2.857
171.143
9.744
1.163
3
0
0
17
352.806
89.091
4.286
193.143
4.652
1.015
3
0
0
18
333.957
89.091
4.762
175.571
8.520
1.116
3
0
0
19
359.715
90.455
4.762
180.286
9.432
1.104
3
0
1
20
445.536
85.455
5.714
159.286
16.258
1.180
3
0
0
21
398.958
96.364
1.429
194.857
15.838
1.088
3
0
0
22
293.166
92.273
2.857
173.286
7.032
1.171
3
0
1
23
382.948
93.636
3.333
154.286
10.912
1.335
3
0
1


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 111 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
24
282.546
97.273
1.429
202.429
7.776
1.057
3
0
1
25
306.391
94.091
1.905
175.000
5.627
1.183
3
0
0
26
380.429
90.909
3.810
140.714
21.374
1.421
3
0
0
27
421.714
85.000
5.238
168.286
12.267
1.111
3
0
0
28
400.660
91.364
2.857
150.286
16.582
1.337
3
0
0
29
469.650
86.818
5.714
142.857
18.606
1.337
3
0
0
Table F.12. Initial numerical study: B4, Normal; thirty seeds, seven days.
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
0
306.748
98.636
0.952
173.571
3.639
1.250
0
0
0
1
396.605
92.273
2.381
147.000
3.579
1.381
0
0
0
2
368.676
92.727
2.857
159.429
2.051
1.280
0
0
1
3
396.710
95.455
1.905
161.714
1.953
1.299
0
0
0
4
362.752
95.455
1.905
160.714
2.266
1.307
0
0
2
5
302.643
92.727
2.857
192.000
4.987
1.062
0
0
0
6
379.987
92.727
1.905
164.857
5.653
1.237
0
0
0
7
367.838
97.273
1.905
206.857
9.867
1.035
0
0
0
8
268.700
97.273
1.429
184.714
1.359
1.159
0
0
0
9
483.927
91.364
2.381
183.286
1.528
1.097
0
0
1
10
411.304
94.545
1.905
182.857
6.634
1.137
0
0
0
11
373.358
91.364
2.381
201.286
1.547
0.999
0
0
1
12
354.187
92.273
2.381
172.000
2.388
1.180
0
0
0
13
339.547
92.273
2.857
185.857
6.262
1.092
0
0
0
14
445.841
89.545
4.762
180.857
1.456
1.089
0
0
0
15
418.413
94.545
0.952
167.000
1.238
1.246
0
0
0
16
345.342
93.636
0.952
167.143
2.342
1.232
0
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 112 of 115
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
17
311.474
94.545
3.333
185.429
1.802
1.122
0
0
0
18
349.115
91.818
3.333
168.429
4.516
1.199
0
0
0
19
384.601
93.636
2.381
176.571
3.346
1.167
0
0
1
20
382.430
94.091
2.381
171.571
3.900
1.206
0
0
0
21
430.336
96.364
1.429
199.571
7.362
1.062
0
0
0
22
320.534
95.455
3.333
165.714
5.999
1.267
0
0
1
23
431.231
93.636
2.381
163.429
4.777
1.260
0
0
0
24
319.875
97.727
0.952
201.143
3.789
1.069
0
0
1
25
310.064
96.364
1.905
171.000
1.536
1.240
0
0
1
26
398.448
92.273
3.333
143.857
4.218
1.411
0
0
0
27
386.998
92.727
2.381
171.429
1.025
1.190
0
0
1
28
439.788
90.909
2.381
162.429
2.542
1.231
0
0
1
29
432.529
94.545
1.429
158.571
2.949
1.312
0
0
0
Table F.13. Prose feasibility; two-day window, seed zero. All decisions were held.
Policy
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
B10
Derived-field 
collapse
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B10
Normal
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B3
Derived-field 
collapse
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B3
Normal
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B4
Derived-field 
collapse
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B4
Normal
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B9
Derived-field 
collapse
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0
B9
Normal
0
8.513
100.000
0.000
237.500
0.000
0.232
2
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 113 of 115
Table F.14. Structured-rule controls; two-day window, seed zero.
Policy
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
B3
Derived-field 
collapse
0
178.272
100.000
0.000
231.000
10.467
0.238
0
0
0
B3
Normal
0
97.066
100.000
0.000
224.000
1.526
0.246
0
0
0
B4
Derived-field 
collapse
0
67.673
100.000
0.000
231.000
5.817
0.238
1
0
0
B4
Normal
0
96.499
100.000
0.000
225.000
1.526
0.244
0
0
0
Table F.15. V2 L0 (llm_v2_no_recovery); two seeds, fourteen days.
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
Capacity cut
13
750.366
95.556
2.619
205.286
4.546
2.095
0
0
1
Capacity cut
29
859.773
96.000
2.143
214.857
11.992
2.011
1
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
13
906.030
86.000
7.381
172.429
19.709
2.244
5
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
29
882.563
92.000
4.286
196.643
22.010
2.105
6
0
0
Feed gap
13
906.030
86.000
7.381
172.429
19.709
2.244
5
0
0
Feed gap
29
882.563
92.000
4.286
196.643
22.010
2.105
6
0
0
Normal
13
760.716
95.556
2.619
204.214
5.147
2.106
0
0
0
Normal
29
832.295
96.444
1.667
210.857
13.135
2.058
1
0
0
Table F.16. V2 L1 (llm_v2_recovery); two seeds, fourteen days.
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
Capacity cut
13
750.366
95.556
2.619
205.286
4.546
2.095
0
0
1
Capacity cut
29
859.773
96.000
2.143
214.857
11.992
2.011
1
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
13
760.716
95.556
2.619
204.214
5.147
2.106
0
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
29
832.295
96.444
1.667
210.857
13.135
2.058
1
0
0
Feed gap
13
906.030
86.000
7.381
172.429
19.709
2.244
5
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 114 of 115
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
Feed gap
29
882.563
92.000
4.286
196.643
22.010
2.105
6
0
0
Normal
13
760.716
95.556
2.619
204.214
5.147
2.106
0
0
0
Normal
29
832.295
96.444
1.667
210.857
13.135
2.058
1
0
0
Table F.17. V2 P0 (parser_no_recovery); two seeds, fourteen days.
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
Capacity cut
13
750.366
95.556
2.619
205.286
4.546
2.095
0
0
1
Capacity cut
29
859.773
96.000
2.143
214.857
11.992
2.011
1
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
13
906.030
86.000
7.381
172.429
19.709
2.244
5
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
29
882.563
92.000
4.286
196.643
22.010
2.105
6
0
0
Feed gap
13
906.030
86.000
7.381
172.429
19.709
2.244
5
0
0
Feed gap
29
882.563
92.000
4.286
196.643
22.010
2.105
6
0
0
Normal
13
760.716
95.556
2.619
204.214
5.147
2.106
0
0
0
Normal
29
832.295
96.444
1.667
210.857
13.135
2.058
1
0
0
Table F.18. V2 P1 (parser_recovery); two seeds, fourteen days.
Scenario
Seed
Cost USD
Fill %
Stockout %
Mean stock
Bullwhip
Turns
Holds
Hard viol.
Ref. dev.
Capacity cut
13
750.366
95.556
2.619
205.286
4.546
2.095
0
0
1
Capacity cut
29
859.773
96.000
2.143
214.857
11.992
2.011
1
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
13
760.716
95.556
2.619
204.214
5.147
2.106
0
0
0
Derived-field 
collapse
29
832.295
96.444
1.667
210.857
13.135
2.058
1
0
0
Feed gap
13
906.030
86.000
7.381
172.429
19.709
2.244
5
0
0
Feed gap
29
882.563
92.000
4.286
196.643
22.010
2.105
6
0
0
Normal
13
760.716
95.556
2.619
204.214
5.147
2.106
0
0
0
Normal
29
832.295
96.444
1.667
210.857
13.135
2.058
1
0
0


EVIDENCE-GATED AUTONOMY  /  M5 + FRESHRETAILNET-50K
Page 115 of 115
Table F.19. All sixteen recorded forecast backtest cases; thirty bottom series and 112 aggregate nodes. Lower error scores are better; coverage is reported against a 95% 
interval target.
Model
Origin index
Role
WRMSSE
Weighted pinball
CRPS
Coverage %
croston_sba
1800
Overlapping descriptive
1.20383
0.36674
0.62790
94.405
croston_sba
1828
Overlapping descriptive
1.42780
0.42589
0.64551
94.643
Native GRU/NB
1800
Overlapping descriptive
1.79618
0.40671
0.58237
93.929
Native GRU/NB
1828
Overlapping descriptive
1.71381
0.43887
0.62141
96.071
croston_sba
1760
Pre-study holdout
1.26410
0.58463
0.58649
97.381
croston_sba
1788
Pre-study holdout
1.33625
0.38161
0.63009
95.357
Native GRU/NB
1760
Pre-study holdout
1.44460
0.42540
0.51009
97.738
Native GRU/NB
1788
Pre-study holdout
2.01835
0.47638
0.64160
93.929
lightgbm
1760
Pre-study holdout
1.28532
0.47244
0.53955
97.143
lightgbm
1788
Pre-study holdout
1.80343
0.49123
0.65094
93.095
seasonal_naive
1760
Pre-study holdout
1.63697
0.84973
0.78446
91.071
seasonal_naive
1788
Pre-study holdout
1.57705
0.46101
0.77301
92.262
lightgbm
1800
Overlapping descriptive
1.49309
0.41168
0.61588
93.929
lightgbm
1828
Overlapping descriptive
1.85932
0.53388
0.65519
95.119
seasonal_naive
1800
Overlapping descriptive
1.53790
0.55032
0.87648
88.571
seasonal_naive
1828
Overlapping descriptive
1.59260
0.55467
0.80829
91.429
